(1832)
Date : 17/05/22 2:04 PM
https://nla.gov.au:443/tarkine/nla.obj-3016019792
Copyright varies by issue and article
Reason for copyright status: Serials have an open range of dates.
Copyright status was determined using the following information:
Material type: Literary Dramatic Musical
Copyright status may not be correct if data in the record is incomplete or inaccurate. For
more information regarding Copyright in Library Collections visit http://copyright.org.au
and http://www.nla.gov.au/copyright-in-library-collections
The National Library of Australia supports creativity, innovation and knowledge-exchange
but does not endorse any inappropriate or derogatory use. Please respect indigenous
cultural and ethical concerns.

JTTSeaenT

NATIONAL

OF AUSTRALIA
 The Hobart Town almanack for the year ...
| |
|
a |
THE POST OFFICE.
qaarees""=_D
The inland mail.across the island, is despatciy
from Hobart-towa, on horseback, every Satur:
. | morning, and arrives at Ransom’'s inn, Green powd
about 10 o'clock, the messenger Jeaving letters, &
at every house along the road to which they are d
iW rected, and also at Roseneath inn, Mr, Gages, J.1
Old beach, constable James's, the Crown inn, Ba
. dad, and Mr. Butcher's inn, Constitution hill, t
! inhabitants adjacent to which places, seading for the
i letters, Lhe same system ts pursaed all along t)
; i other toads, letters in answer being deposit
by the’settlers‘at the same places of call, in time 4
. the messenger to recerve' and convey them ‘to tw
. on their return.
From the Greenponds the m ils are cariued
foot. <A branch messengerireceives the letters al
c papers for the Black mat bh, Clyde, Shannon, a
places adjacent, and arrives at Bothwell the san
. evening. The second messenger to Port Dalrymp
4 who receives the mail and starts from Green pon
; | also imm: diately on the orrival of the first, arriv
; at Mr. Guest's inn, Lovely banks, about 12 o'cloc
. at Jericho, about 3 in the afternoon, and at M
: Presneli’s inn, Sorell springs, about 8 m U
evening.
_ The third messenger then relieves him, and 2
;
a |
« \
: \
Page 270
nla.obj-3016059322
National Library of Australia
 The Hobart Town almanack for the year ...
ACHE EY, Te
4 : ee
MESSENGERS. a4, | | Or
vives at Ross bridge about 8 o'clock on Sonday (| Me
morning. Herehe is met by a’branch messenger, | %
who conveys the despatches forthe settlers on Mae- | ' Af
quarie and Lake rivers, as far as Mr. Corn: ys, where )
he remains all Monday, apd returnson Tuesday in \) i,
time to meet the Launceston mess: nger On lis ‘Way He
back. Having deivered his packet ‘to the branch “ *
messenger, the thid nessenger proces ds on the road i ;
until he reaches Campbell-town, whete he is again
met by another bran bh messenyver to St. Pay)’s Pate:
plaius, as far ds Mayor Gray's, from wherce here- i
turns ip time also to nveet the messenger from Laon- ‘a
eeston on Tuesday morning. The ‘third messenger yi
usually arrives at Mr Willis’s, Wanstead, about one ;
o'clock, where a fourth messenger recetves his load | ay
: ee ah!
and ariives at Mr. Gibson's on the South esk, about | "y
5 in the afternoon, “Here he deposits all the lettérs ‘
addressed to persons in that neighbonrhood, andalbso
about the lower part of the Lake viver and part ‘of :
Norfolk plains, Mr Archer, J.P. invariably sending ;
Aa servant to meetthe messenger goiny and coniibc. {
Atthe Perth punt, the messenzeris also met bya ’
constable despatched from Captain Smith, the Poljce .
Magistrate of Norfolk plains, who conveys the fe. }
mainder of the letters and papers for the settlers in ;
thatneighSourhvod. The mail ‘afterwards proceéds ! :
and arrives at Launceston generally, about 8 ‘o'elock | r
op Sunday evening. j
The messenger to George-town is despatched éarly | ya
, . . 2 «
the following morning, but does not return in time ‘
before the return post from Launceston is @es- i
patched early on ‘lnesday morning. The latter | :
‘ > ; , . >. , ° . ‘
beach s Mr, Presnell’s inn the same night, receiving LF | ;
the bags atthe punt, Lake river, St, ‘Paul’s plains,
aud Koss bridge. 1e '
On Wedovsday moroing the’ post ledvev Mr, Pres.
!
|
\) | ie
| aay
1 j) eae
4 :
Page 271
nla.obj-3016059457
National Library of Australia
 The Hobart Town almanack for the year ...
ONAL IBIE Sha ER OU Pye BIL MID MADR OLED Ro na aL ec
234 POST OFFICE.
: nell’s, receives the despatches from Oatlands an
any Jericho, & arrives at the Green ponds about] o'clock
,y The mail from the Clyde is then received, and th
, whole is brought into Hobart town on horseback 1
| the evening.
The post to New Norfolk starts from Hobart tow
, at the same time as the first ort Dalrymple messen
‘i rer, leaving the letters and papers addressed tr u
) honses on the road as he goes along. At New Nor
| folk be is met by a second messenger, who procee:
} to Mr. Cawthorne’s, where he leaves the despatche
, for the settlers in that district, and from thence to th
Lower Clyde, as far as Mrs Bromley's where tt
Dita settlers about Jones’ river and the Ouse send fi
their letters. The messenger remains at Mrs. Bron
Jey’s until Monday noon, when he starts with the ma
for New Norfolk, which he reach: s the same eves
“ | jng- The post leaves New Norfolk on Tuesday mon
a ing, and arrives in Hobart town abont three on I've
day afternoon. He again sets off to New Nortol
Sh on Wednesday morning, and returns to Hobart tow
4) on Thursday afternoon about three, :
i | The post for Pittwater starts by the first beat o
ON) Saturday morning, and reaches Clarence plains abo
ten o'clock, the Coal river Bridge about three in th
, afternoon, and Sorell the same evening, passing b
Orielton. On Sunday about one o clock he leavi
nO Sorell, and returns by the same road to Hobart tow)
| which he reaches early on Monday morning.
ft A messenger to Oyster bay, conveying letters, &
| to Mariaisland and Waterloo point, |s despaiche
‘f onee a week, or as often as the state of the weathe
Sb the rivers aad the road will permit,
| By the late Act of Council, regulating the Po
office, ascale of pustage is fixed at the rate of 3
fur the eouveyance of a single letter @ distance ™
\
Page 272
nla.obj-3016059584
National Library of Australia
 The Hobart Town almanack for the year ...
;
OR. ug
MESSENGERS, 2u5
‘ceéding ten miles, and so on in proportiun for
Inger distances, and double, triple, or quadruple lét-
fers, amounting to Is. for 100 miles of distance; for
a despatch weighing not more than half an ounce,
vhicb is considered single, whether containing enclo-
sures or not, or 2s. 6d. for a quadruple despatch not
‘xceeding an ounce and a quarter. Mails are mad
. we p
ip at the Post offices for every vessel which leaves
the port of Hobart town, or Launceston, and al! ves- .
sels departing from the island, are by this Act com.
pelicd to take mails. Colonial newspapers are ex.
*mpt from postage, When this Act comes into fore
ttis probable that some new arrangements will take
piace, among the chief of which, we presume, will be
the establishment of a one horse chaise, to run be-
tween Hobart town and Launceston, which wil! !
ford the branch mi engers time to proceed to more |
remote parts and cony -y answers. The weight ot
the mails increasing every week, will soon be mor
‘all & messe ge! n foot can well Carry,
:
;
" .
h
2 '
; '*
Page 273
nla.obj-3016059716
National Library of Australia
