Vol. 4 No. 16 (April 1841)
Date : 17/05/22 2:52 PM
https://nla.gov.au:443/tarkine/nla.obj-1873615186
Copyright varies by issue and article
Reason for copyright status: Serials have an open range of dates.
Copyright status was determined using the following information:
Material type: Literary Dramatic Musical
Copyright status may not be correct if data in the record is incomplete or inaccurate. For
more information regarding Copyright in Library Collections visit http://copyright.org.au
and http://www.nla.gov.au/copyright-in-library-collections
The National Library of Australia supports creativity, innovation and knowledge-exchange
but does not endorse any inappropriate or derogatory use. Please respect indigenous
cultural and ethical concerns.

TMT

NATIONAL

OF AUSTRALIA
 The Colonial magazine and commercial maritime journal
458
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.* u
PERTH—LAUNCESTON—GEORGE TOWN. = |
Wuen the writer of these sketches commenced his descriptive tour, |
his primary contemplation was to present the reader with a general
picture of the superficial aspect of Tasmanian scenery, occasionally |
| relieving the monotony of mere description by local and personal anee- |
dote, but determining to leave the moral and political reflections, ,
) necessarily suggesting themselves, until the colony had been traversed
| in its length and breadth. This predetermined intention has not been |
q kept. Like the voyage through real life, our Tasmanian guide has wan-
dered deviously from his onward track—it may be, to have gathered a
thistle where he may have hoped to cull a rose—or to pick up a coun-
terfeit, where he had calculated upon a gem. If so, our illustrator is
himself but an illustration of the futility of human design; however
faulty the execution, the honesty of his motive, it is hoped, may in part
plead his apology—that aim being to show Tasmania and the Tasma-
| nians in their true light, and to render justice to a portion of Her
Majesty’s subjects not less loyal, not less enterprising, and, assuredly,
not less moral, than any of their fellow-Britons, be they located where
4 they may.
The narrative has greatly exceeded the writer’s imagined limit ; but
having heretofore experienced so much consideration, he trusts his
readers will do him the favour to accompany him in his rapid journey
. to its goal.
| r| The close of the ninth chapter brought the descriptive portion of
; ihe tour town to the period of incendiarism at Hunterston, at which
| ¥y hospitable mansion we left the travellers refreshing. Quitting that .
charming locality, the fading light of an autumnal day barely sufficed
| to carry the equestrians across the fine pastoral mead called Weasel
Plains. The glorious moon, however, poured her brilliant beams upon
| the open forest-landscape that succeeded, wooing the nimble and inof-
i fensive oppossum to disport amid the ramified limbs of the giant gum-
trees; his discordant screech, and the tinkling of some unsettled bell-
wether, being the only sounds that broke upon the ear of night, By
the time that Bark-hut plains were passed, the moon had veiled her
| face, and a thick drizzling rain set in. Dashing onwards, the riders
: nn a
* Continued from p. 240, |
|
|
i a. JL tes Bae fu
Page 38
nla.obj-1873892007
National Library of Australia
 The Colonial magazine and commercial maritime journal
:
VAN DIEMEN'S LAND. 439
crossed the Clyde at the upper ford, making the best of their way b) :
towards Dennistoun. Forward, forward they spurred, Dennistoun, of
like Kippletringan, seemingly eluding their pursuit. They had been a} :
above two hours in endeavouring to compass what ought have been |
easily attained in less than one. They had lost their way—hopelessly j | |
—helplessly —straying hither and thither, like drunken men, uncon- oe
scious of their whereabout. At length, thoroughly drenched, and | |
nearly rigid from the intense cold, a twinkling light was deseried ; but s |
in their hurry to reach it, they had nearly precipitated themselves and of
their steeds into one of the dangerous bends of the Clyde. That difli- k |
culty successfully mastered, they gained the welcome portals of Ratho |
House; its hospitable proprietor, Mr. A. Reid, rendering his half- bi |
drowned guests the kindly courtesy and warm-hearted welcome they of |
stood so much in need of. , |
The main road from Bothwell to Hobart Town (distant forty-six h |
miles) is across the ridge of a long and almost impracticable mountain, F |
named the Den Hill, whose ascent and descent at the point known as hi |
the Black Marsh, is frequently fatal both to conveyances and cattle ; 4 |
in fact, the elite of English “whips” would be apt to stare at the a
course our Tasmanian Jehws unhesitatingly pursued, dashing their Rf |
tandems full-tilt over pathless tracts encumbered with fallen trees, ul |
giant limbs, ponderous surface-stones, and trying inequalities, whose |
heights and hollows are graphically styled “black fellows’ graves.” Hi |
The river Jordan winds its slender streamlet through the fertile basin 1; :
of the Black Marsh—in winter a circumscribed, but dangerous torrent ; ri !
in summer a wasted channel, unconscious of the limpid element, save oR
where occasional ponds give evidence of its existence. Ata distance it |
of eleven miles from the Clyde, the Bothwell road merges in that from ue |
Launceston; but as that is not the path we intend, at present, to iy |
traverse, we shall quit Ratho, threading our way towards Oatlands ‘|
through the mountain defile of Miles’ opening. This, like the Den | |
Hill, is another arduous pass, and, being infinitely less frequented, is, iH |
of course, so much the more puzzling, if not almost terrific. As at |
Dennistoun, it was the writer’s hap to become involved with a friend i |
amid its difficult mazes. The rain streamed in torrents—the wind blew )
a hurrieane—the forests groaned and quivered, whilst the pair of t
travellers, then but in their bush novitiate, became at every step the . ‘i
more and more involved. Nearly impracticable mountains surrounded i]
them, and ever and anon they were compelled to dismount, forcing |
their way through tangled underwood, whose copious distributions af
could searcely increase the humid condition of their flowing garments, F }
ij
i)
ii
|
Page 39
nla.obj-187389261 7
National Library of Australia
 The Colonial magazine and commercial maritime journal
—_
Bie
ae
mh) 4
rf ie 4 440 VAN DIEMEN’ N
| ri ; AS DizMEN S LAND.
eri i
| an Onwards they toiled, ofttimes leading their jaded but willing horses
hee across stock and stone to the summit of one hard-won acclivity, but to
Hi | . | COPAACaee an instant and seemingly hopeless desceut on the other side.
tis th For one moment Ene sun, hastening to its set, broke forth. Such was
ig the doubtful Hgat Cast upon the misty scene, that a far-off plain
! We | presented to the o’ertired travellers the appearance of a cultivated
ait field. With a cheering shout they spurred in the direction, only to be
ins | disappoints d. A sound like that of human voices fel] upon their ear—
Wait at all events they thought so. The savage locality—its frequent resort
tet by the hostile blacks—struck chill upon their hearts. True, they car-
He ) ried pistols, but they were fliné pistols, and, upon examining the pan,
Wie the priming was fonnd to be nearly as liquid as Warren’s jet. The
Hi: sole alternative w; push on haphazard. This they did at a rapid
. pace. Fortunately their random course proved the right one, and the
: day closed much more auspiciously than it had promised.
He's Two officers of the Bengal army, relying upon their locality bump,
fi became entangled in this manner. They had neither haversack nor
is pocket: pistol (alias spirit-flask), nor had they any means of striking a
\ light. Day closed, and they found themselves two very pretty “ babes
i in the wood.” In their benighted wanderings, they stumbled upon a
deserted stock-hut. Here they and their steeds took shelter; the cren-
. tlemen taking advantage of such heat as two or three old sheep-skins
\ imparted.
[In one of the early chapters it was alleged that the most direct route
betwixt Hobart and Launceston lay through New Norfolk, Hollow
Tree, and Bothwell. By the road now in use, the distance is computed
to be about 120 miles. They who profess to have a knowledge of the
other, aver that by passing Sorrel Lake, Regent’s Plains, and debouch-
ing upon the Maequarie by the gorge called Lake River Opening, at
least twenty miles would be saved. Possibly the first cause which
| i} 4 called colonial attention to the subject was the Turpin-like ride of a
s \ ticket-of-leave, or time-expired convict, named Richardson: to whom
: ich every Tasmanian highway and by-way was intimately known.
7 i) i Richardson, as appears, had committed a felony upon a given day,
| ) ¥ in or near Launceston. Having been almost immediately apprised
. that there was conclusive evidence to fix the crime upon him, he forth-
| with caparisoned a very fine white mare he had. Giving her the rein,
Neu he made a straight course across the unenclosed country, passing
| through the Lake River Opening, and with his high-mettled, uninjured
Mm jue courser reaching Hobart Town at an early hour of the following
ere morning. Here he rendered himself as conspicuous as possible,
ik |
ae
4 i"!
Page 40
nla.obj-1873893154
National Library of Australia
 The Colonial magazine and commercial maritime journal
— : - - : F q
a |
ae
|
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND. 44] a
making pretence of business with some of the most respectable inha- 4g
bitants, upon whom he ingeniously yet naturally fixed hour, day, and a |
date. Ere long he was apprehended, tried, and acquitted; the most ; |
unquestionable evidence, deposing to have seen him at Hobart Town 4 |
early in the morning of the afternoon succeeding that on which he was | |
charged with the offence at Launceston. An alibi was thus established ; , | |
it being deemed impossible that he could have been at both places. a |
within so short a space; more especially as he had used no inn, either BI :
for his own or Arab’s refreshment. i:
To return to Miles’ Opening :— Emerging eastwards from that eg
devious pass, the traveller finds himself among the fertile meads which 4 |
skirt the Jordan and its dangerous fords. Bearing slightly north-east, the on |
lands of Anstey Barton lie before him. This estate is alike picturesque a
and profitable, comprising a large area of fine pastoral downs, with a | |
goodly proportion of rich arable soil. Its proprietor, Mr. Anstey, long 8
and ably held the office of police-magistrate at’ Oatlands, with a seat in iI |
that shadow of a shade of representative right—the legislative council! iq |
After Mr. Anstey’s resignation, Mr. Murdoch, an old and proved public i |
servant, and subsequently Mr. Whitefoord, filled the Oatlands magis- i |
terial chair. That chair, it is said, was vacated by Mr. Murdoch, mi
because he was expected to render a subservience which, as a man of i |
spirit, he did not feel disposed to brook. Oatlands is a thriving, but | |
not prettily situated town; it is placed nearly midway between the iW
southern and northern capitals. a :
A few miles north of Oatlands we enter St. Peter’s Pass, a stern i |
mountain defile, through which an excellent road has long been cut ;
at its northern end the Salt-Pan Plains may be said to commence. i |
These are extensive flats of choice sheep-pasturage—their name being F |
derived from the salt which is gathered upon a certain part of them. i
Quitting the most direct path to Launceston, let us diverge a little to Mi |
the left hand, or westwards. By that means a glance will be attained i |
of Ellinthorpe Hall, and whilst our steeds—thanks to the liberality i
of its proprietor, Mr. Clarke—are grinding their corn, we shall inspect if :
the spacious and delightful premises. Ellinthorpe is a charming and b |
extensive property, upon which the owner. has effected very striking i |
improvements. Every thing there is on a large scale; the mansion, i
under the able superintendence of Mrs. Clarke, being, or having been | ,
—for we treat of some years since—devoted to the reception of the i |
Tasmanian fair, who, to the amount of sixty or seventy, are instructed | |
in the prevalent studies and accomplishments of the parent-land ; i
education in all its diversified branches being imparted by resident a
a |
a
iin
f
Page 41
nla.obj-1873893593
National Library of Australia
 The Colonial magazine and commercial maritime journal
r a
| 442 VAN DIEMEN'S LAND. "
| teachers, to procure the best of whom neither pains nor expense are
| spared. Mrs, Clarke was long domiciled in Hobart Town, until the
perfection of arrangements at Ellinthorpe enabled her and her pupils
to remove to that healthy spot. .
Ellinthorpe is a little town of itself. There they are their own but- |
, chers, bakers, brewers, millers, farmers, graziers, blacksmiths, shoe-
| makers, upholsterers, milliners, and so forth. The establishment is well |
| worth viewing, and Mr. and Mrs. Clarke are remarkable for their —
! courtesy to strangers. "
Bidding adieu to Ellinthorpe, we pass through a pleasing pastoral —
| country, crossing the Macquarie River, and wending our way through
the possessions of Messrs. Robert Taylor, (the scene of Crawford, the
bush-ranger’s discomfiture and capture,) Alston, Archer, Bonney, &e.,
until, embarking in the punt, we are wafted across the South Esk, and
safely landed in the pretty and flourishing town of Perth. At the date
| when this “fair town” was visited by the writer and a friend, its —
BP 3 hostelries were poor affairs to brag of, although upon being questioned
as to the contents of the larder, the waiter boldly averred he could
supply whatever the gentlemen should choose. ‘ Well, then, let's —
have a rasher and eggs, without delay.” The man of accommodation
stroked his chin, “ I’m afraid, gentlemen,” he softly insinuated —* I'm
| afraid our bacon is not the very primest.” |
| * Well, well, never mind ; ham will do equally well.” tal
r ** Did you say ham, sir ? O—h—it is late in the season, sir, and our
| last curing turned out very queer.” ny
“ Well, then, boil the eggs, and let us have a nice tender beef-steak !”
Poor Yessir looked unutterable things. “ Why, what’s amiss now, man
| —why don’t you get the eggs and steak ?” ii
“Very unfortunate, gentlemen, that you should have hit upon the
only articles I really cannot supply. Our hens—hang them—have left
off laying, and I don’t think an egg eould be had in Perth, for love or
, money.” a
*“ Let us have the steak, then.” are i
. ‘** Would’nt you prefer a cold boiled shoulder of mutton ?” As
| * Detestable!" exclaimed both, but the anything of the Perth hos-
telry resolved itself into this alone; and hunger, that admirable sauce,
caused the very bones of the “detestable” to be exquisitely polished.
Perth then was the exception to colonial inns, where good cheer, and
plenty of it, is rarely wanting. Appetite appeased, we reached the hospi-
. table door of Major M‘Leod, at the same moment as Mr. Henry Arthur
\ 4 and several officers (in full fig) of H. M. 4th regiment. The M‘Leods
\ ' ;
Page 42
nla.obj-1873894328
National Library of Australia
 The Colonial magazine and commercial maritime journal
. VAN DIEMEN’S LAND. 445 |
were totally unprepared for such a visit, which was caused by a hoaxing |
note written in their name. However, a hearty welcome, lots of music, ) |
and abundance of good spirits, made the evening pass delightfully. |
The situation of Perth, perched as it is, upon the northern bank of |
the Esk, is as picturesque as it is healthy, and, being the centre of a |
very charming country, must speedily become a place of consequence. 8
After its issue from Arthur’s Lakes, Lake River fertilizes a rich tract
of country, losing its distinctive title by an union with the far less of
constant waters of the Macquarie, which shortly afterwards become } | |
merged in the South Esk, at a point a few miles below Perth. At no og
great distance from Perth lies the town and district of Westbury, said |
to be one of the finest cattle countries in the island; and at a still ‘ |
shorter distance, the beautiful and much-prized Norfolk Plains—by am |
which appellation, however, the entire district is known. Beyond that og
district, and in the north-west angle of Tasmania, lie Circular Head, Fi
Emu Bay, Middlesex Plains, Surrey and Hampshire Hills, together i |
with the entire principality, comprising the 850,000 acres appertaining of
to the Van Diemen’s Land Company. With a large capital, and i | |
every available advantage consequent upon their position in Britain, | :
this company has achieved less than nothing, their culture and amount L
of stock being vastly inferior to many second-rate private settlers. |
They appear at length to have felt their inferior position, and seem ai
determined to awake from the lethargic stupor that has so long pos- i
sessed them. A new and most intelligent agent (Mr. James Gibson) has =F
been appointed, and as he has had ample colonial experience to direct it
his ability, it may reasonably be inferred, that the Van Diemen’s Land |
Company will yet yield a noble remuneration to its shareholders, and 8
effect much towards the advancement of a colony of whose soil they |
hold so large a slice. Liberal returns, nevertheless, are but the fruits a
of liberal outlay ; and the company would do well to bear in mind, Wi |
that every Tasmanian settler has achieved his position at a cost of il |
harassing difficulty and sore privation. The Broad-street establish- it
ment is still in its nonage, and upon their fostering care, quite as much qj |
as upon their agent's assiduity, depends the healthiness or converse of the if
bantling. Patience and perseverance, and ere long it walks alone. i |
Bidding adieu to Perth, a delightful ride of about thirteen miles y |
brings us to the Northern Capital—the land in whose environs, is ,
infinitely superior to that of its southern competitor. The character i
of the country, too, widely differs. On the south side, the predomi- a
nating features are huge mountains—their base rising precipitously |
from out the waters, which they girdle with an adamantine band; the )
i
Page 43
nla.obj-1873894793
National Library of Australia
 The Colonial magazine and commercial maritime journal
woumet
KAP
) YO ‘
Near | )
, " rt VAN DIEMEN'S LAND.
aR
| Hit» diminutive valleys appr aring to be but the cvround-work or stand for
| Nee another gigantic uprearing. On the northern shores, the mountains
Hii | ny (not less lofty ) are more remote, the intermediate space being orace-
hes fully moulded into gently undulating knolls or meads, of the most
hau productive richness. The glance from the descending point of Cocked-
Neve Hat Hill gives ample evidence of this.
( oT Like every Tasmanian town or village, the streets of Launceston are
i rf wide, airy, and regularly laid off at right angles. It possesses nume-
Wh | rous excellent houses, warehouses, shops, and publie buildings, although
Hi the latter are by no means equal in importance to those of Hobart
it ; Town, with which it never ean hope to contest the palm of beauty,
iy beeause not a single stone-quarry is to be found in the vicinity of the
i: northern, whilst the southern city abounds with free-stone of various
hues and the finest grain—the quarries of New Town being fully
equal to those of the tar-fame d Craig-Leith.* Launceston. therefore,
qn is essentially a town of bricks. As a port it was long neglected, the
f | intricate and tedious navigation of the Tamar causing it to be too
; much overlooked ; added to which, ships of burden were unable to lie
\ alongside the wharf, those that did so taking the ground at low water
if —for (as the Launcestonians boast ) the ‘lamar is unlike the tideless
Derwent, which rarely exceeds between three and four feet of rise and
. fall, whilst the Tamar achieves some fourteen or fifteen.
The admirable trading-position of Launceston, and the spirit of its
’ enterprising ner hants, if d ere long to the deve lopement of its great
| capabilities. in 1827. the Admiral Cockburn, a ship of 350 or 400
| rons, ascend d the Tamar. and commenced loading for London. This
being the first vessel of magnitude to lay on in the northern waters,
the event was duly and joyously eelebrated. Many and larger vessels
have since succeeded, and although some idea of the importance of
Launceston may be inferred by consulting the daily shipping-advertise-
ments of the Zimes, still it 7s but an idea, conveying no adequate
; . notion of the lar re amount of coasting and intercolonial trade.
: ; In 1IS31 or 32. a beautiful steamer ( The Tamar ) was built on the
| F (Seotch) Clyde, for the purpose of navigating and towing ships between
) iy Launceston and George Town. From some cause or other the proprie-
, tors sold her to a Sydney company, and Tasmania was deprived of her
services ere she had well anchored within her waters. Steam-tugs,
Neu however, must speedily enrich their proprietors, and facilitate the ad-
| vent and departure of the Launceston shipping.
4 * The writer has been told that a stone quarry fas been discovered near
bs Cocked- Hat Hill
HPs
iE
A)
Page 44
nla.obj-1873895385
National Library of Australia
 The Colonial magazine and commercial maritime journal
|
a |
VAN DIEMEN S LAND. 445 |
The Tamar, like its English name-sake, is greatly a salt-water i :
estuary, Launceston being placed upon the bends of the South and i] |
North Esk rivers, which lose their individuality in the Tamar. The 3
South Esk precipitates itself, at its point of junction, over a consider- vg
able ledge of rocks to the westward of the town. This spot is called 1 | |
the Cataract, and when the river is in full volume, it presents a.tor- Bi |
rent of no little grandeur. Ships are said to have their copper well |
scoured by hauling as near as possible to the Cataract. mn
Launceston boasts a fair proportion of schools, both public and of
private. There are also several churches—Episcopalian, Presbyterian, |
Wesleyan, and others. The chief of these is St. John’s, situated in q |
the centre of the town. The barracks are much smaller, and not near 4 :
so delightfully placed as those of Hobart Town. The garrison-duty : !
devolves upon three or four companies of a regiment detached from | |
their head-quarters in New South Wales. The disposition of troops i |
in Australasia appears to be singular; for instance, detachments are s |
furnished to Launceston by a corps serving in the sister-colony, whilst 8
the regiment stationed at Hobart Town sends one of its companies to |
Swan River. Would it not be preferable to keep one regiment intact 4 |
in Tasmania, supplying the surplus required from a corps which might A
send out detachments to Launceston, Port Philip, and the Swan? al
Or rather, would not marines prove the more legitimate garrison, i |
affording, as they might easily be made to do, reliefs for our Indian i |
and Pacifie cruisers ? §
Since the establishment at Port Philip and South Australia, the i |
trate of Launceston has mightily increased. This should be an unan- P |
swerable argument with those little-minded cavillers, who seek to fan oa
the flame of jealous rivalry. The more colonies that are“planted along q |
the extensive shores of New Holland and New Zealand, the more i |
advantage will every Austral Briton derive; and if the parent-land th |
will only imitate the anxiety evinced by France and America, and I
throw her protecting banner around her offspring, they will well reward i |
her care. 7 |
Launceston possesses many excellent hotels—of these, the most fre- i |
quented used to be the Cornwall, kept by a very singular character, i |
called Black Dick White. There is a court-house, hospital, penitentiary, | |
and government-house. Here his Excellency resides during his northern i.
tours, which are said to be not quite so frequent as the inhabitants fi |
desire. é |
The Tamar is by no means the splendid counterpart of the Derwent ; ii
in fact, there are few such superb estuaries as the latter to be found, |
The distance between Launceston and the heads below G eorge Town | |
§
Page 45
nla.obj-1873895767
National Library of Australia
 The Colonial magazine and commercial maritime journal
r i he ; ; jas 3 — = ae .
446 VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
is computed to be between forty and fifty miles, George Town, of
late years, has been acquiring great repute for the mildness and salu-
| | brity of its air—circumstances likely to render it a chosen resort—a
species of Tasmanian spa, A few miles westwards lies Port Sorell, at
) the mouth of a tolerably extensive basin, into which the waters of the
river Rubicon empty themselves. It was here that Captain Thomas.
(brother of the member for Kinsale), fell a victim to the fury of the
hostile aborigines. Captain Thomas, unhappily for himself, was pre-
| possessed with an opinion, that the murders inflicted by the savages
were a consequence of want of confidence on the part of the sufferers,
Ile was not the only one who entertained a belief, whose fallacy he was
doomed to illustrate with his life. ri
| Weal The writer has more than once heard Captain Thomas express his
determination to advance frankly and unarmed towards the blacks,
whenever he should chance to meet them. Upon this prineiple he
acted, followed by Mr. Parker, the latter bearing a double-barrelled
. gun under his arm. This was speedily snatched by a woman, and as
| the unfortunate Parker turned round to look after her, he was knocked
on the head by a waddie, and speared in the back. Perceiving the —
fate of his friend, Captain Thomas attempted to fly, but was. speedily
slain. In a fortnight afterwards the bodies were discovered by the aid
of a half-civilized black woman, from whom the particulars of this
| melancholy transaction were elicited. Parker had received ten, the
. Captain twelve spear-wounds, and when found his remains had par-
tially been destroyed by crows and other vermin, The three men who
. committed the murders were taken, but not executed—being remoyed,
. with the rest of their sable brethren, to Flinder’s Island. ifs 4
, The Van Diemen’s Land Establishment, projected by Col. Latour |
tt and others, of which Captain Thomas was the original manager, has
) . greatly benefited both the proprietors and the colony ;—Tasmania, by
the superior description of horses, cattle, sheep, &c., which they im-
ported ; themselves, by the profit they acquired, and by the judicious _
. selection of Cressy—an estate comprising twenty thousand acres of the
. . finest land. »
| The writer of these sketches entreats pardon of his more northern
} fellow-colonists, if he has not sufficiently dwelt upon the beauties and —
capabilities of their portion of the island, It proceeds from no desire
to offer slight ; but the truth is, that, being of the opposite coast, he —
is not so intimately versant of the features which characterize the —
Cornwall division. It may, however, at no distant date, be in his —
| power to make the amende; meanwhile, wishing them health and
| prosperity, he once more begs the reader to turn his face southwards,
,
Page 46
nla.obj-1873896265
National Library of Australia
 The Colonial magazine and commercial maritime journal
7
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND, 447
remarking the supremely fertile and highly-cultivated farms, which so ms
thickly stud Patterson’s Plains. :
Recrossing the Esk at Perth, let us vary the route, by making a o-
direct course for Campbell Town, wending our way through the thickly- | ,
settled district of Bathurst, well adapted both for pastoral and agrestial it )
purposes. on
Here lies the Tasmanian nameson of a spot well beloved of the |
Cockney huntsman—Epping Forest ; not far from whose boundaries § /
the prosperous Campbell Town rears its flourishing head—itself the of
centre of one of the finest districts of the colony. A few miles fur- |
ther south, the Macquarie river is crossed by a long and narrow wooden 4
structure, known as Ross Bridge. This, too, is a rising town, and the B
spot where horse-racing was first fairly established in Tasmania. In + |
this vicinity the government, which erewhile indulged in farming spe- &
culations, had a reserve of 32,000 acres, familiarly styled “ the Ross
Reserves.” These were considered to be the most available in the Py |
island, and when brought to the hammer in 1831 or 1832, the compe- og
titors were both keen and numerous. Land then currently sold at the 4 |
minimum value of 5s. per acre, or a little more. This sale, however, ' |
opened people’s eyes ; one of the sections of 4,000 acres having realized @
upwards of 29s. per acre. It was purchased by a neighbouring pro- | |
prietor, Mr. Benjamin Horne, who, in consequence of the price given, F
was deemed by his brother-colonists well fitted to become an inmate i |
of Bedlam. Mr. Horne, however, well knew his own affairs, and has Wh
had no reason to regret his bargain. The residue, or at least the " |
larger part thereof, was obtained by Mr. Philip Smith, who had many P
difficulties to encounter in perfecting the purchase. | |
Crossing York, we again fall upon Salt Pan Plains, and journey a |
road already traversed, until, passing Oatlands, we reach Jericho upon &§
the Jordan. Jericho can searcely be called a village; and yet pos- i |
sessing as it does a small school-house or chapel, an excellent inn, and 4 )
the dwellings of several most respectable settlers, converging towards i |
it as a central point, it showed, at an early date, much more of the i |
town than other incipient spots especially marked out for such an {
honour. 4 |
A good deal of confusion sometimes arises from the same name being t
given to different places; for instance, one Spring Hill has already ]
been passed in review—we are now approaching another, upon whose a
brow a beautiful and spacious inn, built of free-stone in dressed courses, i |
has been opened by Mr. Vincent. We shall not, however, pause here, ia
but descending the hill, survey the Lovely Banks as we ride leisurely by tf )
their sheep-covered downs, until, checking our career, we stop to con- |
© |
:
Page 47
nla.obj-1873896855
National Library of Australia
 The Colonial magazine and commercial maritime journal
448 VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
template that much-admired and garden-like spot—the Cross Marsh, —
This has always been a favoured and favourite locality ; the beauty of
: its situation—the fertility of its soil—the proximity to water-carriage,
all combine to render it a highly desirable neighbourhood; and from
| its position, on the highways to Launceston and Bothwell, an admirable
site for a thriving market-town. The estates are of moderate extent; —
the most striking being Mount Vernon, the property of Anthony Fenn
Kemp, Esq., Tor Man or Tue Prorie. Here also there.is avery
| comfortable inn, with cattle-yards, sheep-pens, and every accommoda-
| tion for the sale of stock, which, owing to its central advantages, are
| frequently driven there. A little beyond this inn the Green Ponds
commence. Here there is a church, and, as the farms are small; the
; population is correspondingly numerous. A few miles from Green
Ponds, we reach the crown of Constitution Hill, the roadway of which q
(at the writer's last visit) was undergoing extensive and beneficial
changes—the ascent being rendered much less arduous, and the ear-
riage-road much more solid. After a winding descent, we find our-
selves before the door of the Swan Inn, situated at the mouth of the
upper valley of fertile Bagdad. The external appearance of the house —
Py promised little, but prompt civility met our travellers at its threshold.
Unlike the Perth hostelry, the host (late Mr. Butcher, brother of the —
: well-known Gravesend confectioner) did not promise every thing, but |
| table and sideboard assured the keen-edged mountain-appetite of ample
. and savoury solacement—ham, tongue, ducks, fowls, beef, mutton, and
| cold pasties were ranged in goodly order, whilst an unexceptionable
, bill of fare, of sundry varieties of food, ready for spit or saucepan, was
| immediately presented. An admirable meal was the natural conse-
| quence. At its termination the host presented himself. he
| “ Excuse me, gentlemen,” said he, ** your horses have already been
| . well fed—perhaps you would like to visit them yourselves. My orders
are not to stint—I know how much a man has to depend upon his
horse in this country; but you are aware, gentlemen, the eye of the
. master maketh the fat ox.”’ ret
: We thanked our worthy Boniface, and forthwith proceeded to the _
if stable. It was needless—rack and manger were both full, and the |
| beds nicely littered. Our four-footed friends had regaled as amply as
we, and were lazily masticating an occasional rip of hay. We, there-
fore, returned to our cheerful log-fire, and soothed our inner man with |
a stiff glass of veritable Jamaica—one of those docile creatures, the |
| white magpie, perching beside us, and amusing us with his merry tricks
and incessant garrulity. noo te 2sen63 |
[To be concluded next month.] oa et ere
ou
Shr. 7 —_
Page 48
nla.obj-1873897438
National Library of Australia
