Southern Midlands Council
 Historic Heritage Strategy
          2019-2023

    Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023




                                                                          Introduction




     Southern Midlands Council is established as       (LUPAA), to the management of one-off and
     one of 29 Tasmanian municipal councils            ongoing heritage projects as a means of
     under the Local Government Act 1993.              value-adding to the heritage assets of the
     Comprising of 2611 square kilometres it is one    municipal region.
     of the larger municipal regions in Tasmania,
                                                       This document is guided by SMC’s Strategic
     however with a population of just over 6000
                                                       Plan 2014-2023, as well as other relevant
     people, has one of the smallest populations.
                                                       strategic planning initiatives, such as the
     Nonetheless, the Southern Midlands has a          Oatlands Integrated Development Strategy
     wealth of historic heritage which enriches the    and the Midlands Economic Development
     community, with 220 places on the                 and Land Use Strategy as well as a number
     Tasmanian Heritage Register, over 300 places      of tourism plans and strategies towards which
     on the local heritage schedule, and four          Council has an interest.       This plan also
     heritage precincts.                               considers the interests of various external
                                                       stakeholders having interest in the heritage of
     This document has been developed to guide
                                                       the region (i.e. The Tasmanian Heritage
     Southern Midlands Council (SMC) towards a
                                                       Council, Tourism Tasmania, the Heritage
     more strategic and integrated approach to
                                                       Highway Tourism Region Association) and
     heritage management. For at least 20 years,
                                                       various heritage interest groups as well as
     SMC has undertaken various roles as a
                                                       integrating, where appropriate, state plans,
     heritage manager – from development
                                                       objectives and benchmarks.
     appraisal pursuant to the objectives of the
     Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993

2

                                    Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-23



                                  SMC’s involvement in heritage takes three broad streams:
                                     •   As a Planning Authority under the Local Government
                                         Act 1993, SMC is to administer the statutory
                                         requirements of heritage places in the municipal area
                                         under the Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
                                         (LUPAA – Part 2, Objective 2g), and as a referral body
                                         under the Historic Cultural Heritage Act 1995 (HCHA).
                                     •   As the owner and manager of a number of significant
                                         heritage sites and public spaces, SMC voluntarily acts
                                         to preserve, utilise and promote the heritage values of
                                         these places through various heritage projects.
                                     •   As an advocate within the community – promoting
                                         best practice standards and encouraging the
  Questions or                           community to participate in the management of their
                                         own heritage.
  comments?                          •   As the owner of the Centre for Heritage at Oatlands
                                         (CFH), which incorporates Heritage Building Solutions
Statutory Heritage                       (HBS - a commercial heritage building, restoration and
SMC Development and
Environmental Services Office            consultancy enterprise) and the Heritage Education
85 Main Street                           and Shills Centre (HESC – a not-for-profit heritage skills
KEMPTON TAS 7030                         training organisation). Note that CFH operates under
03 62545050
smc@southernmidlands.tas.gov.au
                                         its own business plan and board, however crossover
                                         initiatives will be included in this plan as appropriate.
Heritage Projects
SMC Heritage Projects Office
                                  The primary document which governs Southern Midlands
Oatlands Gaoler’s Residence
Mason Street                      Council’s heritage (and other) initiatives is the Strategic Plan
OATLANDS TAS 7120                 2014 to 2023, which is updated every ten years (with four-
0418 303184                       yearly review). From this, the Annual Plan sets shorter-term
smc@southernmidlands.tas.gov.au
                                  targets, and the Annual Report reports on the outcomes and
                                  progress of such.      Alongside these documents, the
                                  Community Plan (updated every 5-10 years) assists in the
                                  governance and delivery of these initiatives. This document
                                  has been formulated in accordance with those various plans
                                  and strategies.




                                                                                                      3

    Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023

     In relation to heritage, the following sections of the Strategic Plan are directly relevant:

                          Theme                      Ref.                                                      Key strategy/action

                                                   2.2.1.1.    Seek opportunities to support the development and growth of a wide range of tourism in the Southern Midlands



                                                               Seek opportunities to further develop and link heritage tourism opportunities both within and outside the region,
                                                   2.2.1.2.
          2.2.1. Increase the number of                        including convict sites, the Oatlands Military Precinct and Callington Mill Precinct
          tourists visiting and spending money
          in the municipality.
                                                               Work with Heritage Tasmania and Tourism Tasmania to progress the recommendations of the Tasmanian Historic
                                                   2.2.1.7.
                                                               Heritage Tourism Strategy at the local level



                                                   2.2.1.6     Support and maintain the relationship with the Heritage Highway Touring Region



                                                               Maintain support for viable Council business operations such as Callington Mill Business Precinct, Heritage Building
          2.3. Business                            2.3.1.9.
                                                               Solutions and Heritage Education & Skills Centre



                                                   3.1.1.1     Manage the heritage values of Council owned heritage buildings according to affordable best practice.



                                                               Work in Partnership with the State Government to ensure the strategic long-term management of publicly owned
                                                   3.1.1.2
                                                               heritage sites.



                                                   3.1.1.3     Implement the Oatlands Commissariat Master Plan



                                                   3.1.1.4     Seek to establish the Oatlands gaol site as an historic/archaeological education centre


          3.1.1. Maintenance and restoration
          of significant public heritage assets.   3.1.2.1     Support and monitor ongoing development of the Heritage Skills Centre in Oatlands.


                                                               Facilitate and investigate opportunities for assisting heritage property owners in conserving heritage places
                                                   3.1.2.2
          3.1.2. Act as an advocate for                        alongside sustainable ongoing usage.
          heritage and provide support to
          heritage property owners.
                                                   3.1.3.1     Undertake and encourage research and publications on the heritage values of the Southern Midlands.


          3.1.3. Investigate, document,
          understand and promote the
                                                   3.1.3.2     Undertake the effective heritage interpretation, education & communication programs.
          heritage values of the Southern
          Midlands.

                                                   3.1.3.3     Continue to manage and utilise Councils heritage resources and collections.


                                                               Support the occupancy / use of Council owned heritage buildings and spaces by arts & crafts groups who
                                                   3.1.3.4
                                                               specialise in heritage crafts.



                                                   3.1.3.5     Support the creation of a state authority to develop a strategy and various resource on heritage sites/buildings



                                                               Recognition and ensuring the maintenance of the significance of trees in the landscape especially along the
                                                   3.1.3.6
                                                               Heritage Highway (Midland Highway) and the revegetation where trees have been removed


          3.3.1. Ensure that the cultural
          diversity of the Southern Midlands is    3.3.1.1     Identify, and promote the Cultural heritage of the Southern Midlands through festivals and events.
          maximised.


                                                               Continue to support the State Government’s Regional Planning Initiative and to work in co-operation within the
                                                   3.4.1.1
                                                               Southern Tasmanian region to finalise a new planning scheme.

          3.4.1. A regulatory environment that
          is supportive of and enables                         Encourage the State Government to provide more direction to the planning system through the introduction of
                                                   3.4.1.2
          appropriate development                              more State Planning Policies, State Planning Directives and common statewide planning scheme provisions.


                                                               Make use of the Joint Land Use Planning Initiative (JLUPI) outcomes to develop the local content for the new
                                                   3.4.1.3
                                                               planning scheme.

          4.10.1. Increase the educational
          and employment opportunities
                                                   4.10.1.2.   Provide heritage skills learning opportunities through the centre for heritage.
          available within the Southern
          Midlands.




4

                                        Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-23




                                                                          Statutory
                                                                           Heritage
                                                                         Management




Please note that the Southern Midlands Interim Planning Scheme 2015 is expected to be
replaced by the Tasmanian Planning Scheme during the life of this strategy. Once
approved, the new planning scheme may require a review of this section of the historic
heritage strategy. This will be provided to Council for information in due course.

Pursuant to the objectives (Schedule 1,             Table E.13.1 of the Southern Midlands Interim
objective 2g) of the planning process               Planning Scheme 2015 (the scheme) lists
established by LUPAA, Planning Authorities          individual places considered to have local or
are required to conserve those buildings,           state heritage value – being the local heritage
areas or other places which are of scientific,      schedule – this contains over 300 places. Table
aesthetic, architectural or historical interest,    E.13.2 lists four heritage precincts (Oatlands
or otherwise special cultural value. From this      Township, Callington Mill precinct, Kempton
requirement, local planning schemes in              township precinct and the Heritage Mile
Tasmania have evolved (to varying content           (Mangalore). Tables E.13.3 and E.13.4 intend to
and degrees) heritage provisions and                list cultural landscape precincts and places of
schedules of heritage places through which          archaeological potential but have not yet
this objective is given currency. Traditionally     been populated.          The original heritage
there has been little consistency in how the        schedule was initially complied from a variety
intent of the Act translates into planning          of sources (largely National Trust lists) as part of
scheme provisions, however the raft of              the former planning scheme (1998) was
interim planning schemes currently in place         updated via a more rigorous process as part of
across Tasmania has sought greater                  the 2007 GHD Southern Midlands Heritage
consistence and the forthcoming Tasmanian           project. The interim scheme included most of
Planning Scheme will provide further                the recommendations from that project in
consistence.

                                                                                                           5

    Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023



                                        terms of new listings, revised listings and heritage areas and it
                                        is considered that these listings are generally sound and up-to-
                                        date.

                                        Council manages the heritage values of places listed solely on
                                        Tables E.13.1 and E.13.2 of the scheme and the THC
                                        undertakes a dual assessment of those places on the THR – all
                                        through a discretionary development application for those
                                        proposals which do not meet the criteria for exempt works
                                        under Clause E.13.4 of the scheme.

                                        Under the Historic Cultural Heritage Act 1995, The Tasmanian
                                        Heritage Council (THC) are the authority for applications for
                                        works on places listed on the Tasmanian Heritage Register
                                        (THR). Planning Authorities manage the application process
                                        and must forward any application for works to a place on the
                                        THR for the THC to firstly undertake a preliminary assessment
    Previously endorsed                 and issue a notice of interest/no interest and if the THC wish to
    documents and                       determine an application then a statutory timeframe aligned
                                        with the Planning Authority’s timeframe under LUPAA runs
    policy
                                        (along with public notification and internal/external referral
                                        processes). Once determined, the Planning Authority must
       •   Southern Midlands            include THC conditions and advice on a planning permit for
           Heritage Project 2007
                                        works to listed places and must refuse any permit which the
       •   Joint Land Use Planning      THC refuses.
           Initiative 2008
       •   Southern Midlands            Council’s Planning Officer and Planning Administration staff
           Interim Planning             manage the referrals process and statutory timeframes and all
           Scheme 2015.                 applications (including pre-application enquiries which may
       •   Resolution by Council        result in either an exemption or a need for application) are
           (March 2015) that the        referred to the Manager Heritage Projects for assessment
           principles of the            against the relevant provisions. The overall synchronization of
           ICOMOS Australia Burra
                                        each application is undertaken by the Planning Officer, often
           Charter guide Council’s
           decisions around
                                        determined under delegation as part of the Development
           historic heritage.           Assessment Committee (DAC) process. Any contentious
                                        applications, such as those which attract representations or
                                        are recommended for refusal, are determined by full Council
                                        (as a Planning Authority) with consideration of the
                                        recommendations of the Planning Officer and any other
                                        expert opinion.




6

                                    Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-23




Aboriginal Heritage
Whilst as a Planning Authority Council does not have a
direct role in Aboriginal heritage management under the
scheme, as a property owner and community/heritage
advocate Council has a role to acknowledge and
protect Aboriginal heritage. The Aboriginal heritage of             Lost Heritage
the midlands richly demonstrates millennia of past
occupation and land use and remnants of the ancient
landscape are common. Although Aboriginal heritage is
beyond the scope of this strategy, it is recommended that
SMC give greater consideration to its responsibility as both
an advocate and landowner towards the protection of
Aboriginal cultural heritage through recognition,
outreach projects and compliance with the Aboriginal
Heritage Act 1975.




                                                                         Halfway House, Antill Ponds
                                                                              Rockwood Antill Ponds
                                                                         Grainleigh, Constitution Hill
                                                                                    Swanston Hotel.




                                                                                                         7

    Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023




        1      Initiatives                                                               Short/Medium/
                                                                                         Long-term or
                                                                                         ongoing
        a.     Ensure that heritage strategic planning documents reflect the
               provisions of the Southern Midlands Interim Planning Scheme 2015 (or
                                                                                              O
               successor)

        b.     Continue to participate in relevant legislative review processes or
               relevance to historic and aboriginal heritage management.                      O

        c.     Ensure that rigorous heritage assessments are undertaken in the
               statutory planning process.                                                    O

        d.     Explore resource sharing with other councils for effective and
               consistent statutory heritage management.                                      O

        e.     Develop ‘practice notes’ and other advice for heritage property
               owners to assist in managing the values of their properties (preferably
                                                                                              O
               in collaboration with the Heritage Education and Skills Centre.

         f.    Liaise with Aboriginal Heritage Tasmania for more effective and
               comprehensive systems for managing Aboriginal heritage values in
                                                                                              O
               the Southern Midlands.

         g     Ensure that heritage best-practice is included in the Oatlands
               Structure Plan.                                                                M




       Key to initiative timings
       Short term (S) – Expected to be completed during the life of the strategy.

       Medium term (M) – Expected to be commenced (and possibly completed)
       during the life of the strategy.

       Long term (L) – The eventual goal, which may be completed during the life of
       the strategy, however is more likely to occur after 2018 (with short and medium
       term initiatives working towards that).

       Ongoing (O) – Undertaken throughout the life of the strategy and expected to
       continue beyond 2018.


8

                                      Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-23




                                                                            Heritage
                                                                            Projects




Besides council’s responsibility to manage          conservation management plans, business
historic heritage as per the previous section,      plans and interpretation plans, which are
the strategic plan includes a number of non-        listed here as relevant to each project. The
statutory heritage projects.                        following figure demonstrates that heritage
                                                    projects are driven by Council’s recognition
The support or heritage projects is outside         of the benefits to the community’s sense of
Council’s core mandate a planning authority         place, education and tourism opportunities,
yet is recognised by Council as one of the          and how collaboration and crossover with
key strategies in developing and promoting          initiatives in these other streams are essential
the cultural heritage of the region in order to     for the success of heritage projects:
reap the flow on benefits in terms of
community sense of place, education and
tourism opportunities.      Whilst striving to
demonstrate        best-practice      heritage
management, Council acknowledges the
flow on benefits as an essential part of the
rationale for heritage projects, and the
immeasurable benefits that arise from such.

The heritage projects initiated and managed
by Council are many and varied - a brief
description of the background, current state,
and future directions of these projects will be
provided here. These initiatives are driven by
a number of individual plans, such as

                                                                                                       9

     Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023




                                             Callington Mill
                                             1837
                                             The only working wind-driven flour mill in the
                                             Southern Hemisphere

                                             Note that it is likely that during the early implementation of this
                                             strategy that Callington Mill will be leased to private enterprise
                                             – with the permitted use being defined as the operation and
      Previously endorsed                    maintenance of a historic site and tourist operations reasonably
      documents and                          associated therewith (including retain and interpretation
      policy                                 operations) and reasonably necessary ancillary purposes.
      (excludes technical documents from
      reconstruction)                        The Callington Mill complex is a substantially intact wind and
                                             steam mill complex, established in 1837. The mill tower is the
        •    Callington Mill Historic Site   icon of Oatlands, and the array of extant associated buildings
             CMP 1994                        makes this a unique industrial heritage complex. Since being
        •    Callington Mill Historic site   purchased by the State Government in 1964, the last forty or so
             CMP (addendum) 2004             years have seen various phases of restoration at the Callington
        •    Callington Mill Precinct        Mill Site. Periodic small-scale restoration and investigation of re-
             Plan 2006                       establishment of the mill was undertaken during the 1970s and
                                             1980s. The first major restoration phase was in 1988, when a
        •    Callington Mill Precinct
                                             Bicentennial Grant (also supported by Coca Cola Amatil)
             Strategy 2006
                                             allowed stabilisation and access fitout of the windmill tower.
        •    Risk Identification,
                                             Throughout the 1990s, opportunistic small-scale restoration
             Callington Mill
                                             continued, with a conservation management plan being
             Redevelopment 2006
                                             developed in 1994, and in 1999 the tower cap and fan wheel
        •    A Business Plan for the         were added.
             Redevelopment and
             Ongoing operation of            In 2010 a $2.4m reconstruction and precinct development
             Callington Mill as a            project was implemented, which refitted the mill tower as the
             Financially Sustainable         only working Lincolnshire-style windmill in the Southern
             Enterprise 2006                 Hemisphere producing quality flour and associated products.
        •    Callington Mill Master Plan
             2007

10

                                      Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-23




In 2017, the visitor centre was closed and regular tours of the mill tower ceased – with the intention
of seeking a private operator for the site. As at late 2018, the mill is producing flour in a ‘business
as usual’ capacity however there are no visitor services at the site.

The site retains community uses such as the community garden and the blacksmith’s initiative
which are to be retained for public use and visitation as conditions of any sub-lease.




       2     Initiatives                                                             Short/Medium/
                                                                                     Long-term or
                                                                                     ongoing
       a.    Unsure that Council’s responbibilities in upholding the sub-lease
             and maintenance requirements of Callington Mill are met.
                                                                                            O


       b.    Where possible, explore partnerships projects with the lessee of
             Callington Mill.                                                               O

       c.    Porovide support where possible to the existing community uses
             of the site, namely the blacksmith’s initiatve and community
                                                                                            O
             garden.




                                                                                                          11

     Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023




                                        Oatlands Gaol
                                        The largest regional gaol in Van Diemens Land
                                         Owned by Southern Midlands Council, and the largest building
                                         remaining of the Oatlands Military Precinct, is the 1837
                                         Oatlands Gaol complex.        Comprising of the two-storey
                                         Georgian Gaoler’s Residence, as well as a c2000m2 former
                                         gaol yard and the lower portion of the formerly 6-metre high
                                         sandstone perimeter wall, these are the remains of the largest
                                         regional colonial gaol in Tasmania. Most of the gaol buildings
      Previously endorsed
                                         were demolished in 1937, and in 1954 the yard was filled to
      documents and                      accommodate the municipal in-ground swimming pool.
      policy
                                         The Gaoler’s Residence has been restored as part of a
         •   Oatlands Gaol               $750,000 project and now houses the SMC Heritage Projects
             Conservation                Office, exhibition and museum space as well as an
             Management Plan 2006        archaeological artifact laboratory and store. The building is
         •   Oatlands Gaol Master        publicly accessible 7-days a week via the ‘Oatlands Key’
             Plan 2009                   system and has an active Artist in Residence program. Work
                                         has been done to stabilize the gaol walls and the original
         •   Oatlands Gaol Use &
             Development Plan 2010       arched gateway has been moved back to its original location
                                         beside the Gaoler’s residence after having been moved to
         •   Oatlands Gaol
                                         High Street in 1939.
             Interpretation Plan 2011
         •   Oatlands Gaol Arch
                                         Once the pool is removed, the entire gaol yard will be
             Relocation Project Plan
             2012
                                         available for the implementation of the Oatlands Gaol Master
                                         Plan, which envisages meaningfully interpred public open
         •   Oatlands Gaol and
                                         space with a focus on the archaeology of the site. Substantial
             Supreme Court House
             Use Policy
                                         planning is still required to meet the master plan objectives.

                                         A broad concept document has been developed (but not yet
                                         endorsed) which seeks to utilise the gaol as a centre for
                                         learning relating to heritage, trade skills, archaeology and
                                         museum related fields – exploration of partnerships with the
                                         Centre for Heritage may act to progress that concept.
12

                              Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-23




3    Initiatives                                                         Short/Medium/
                                                                         Long-term or
                                                                         ongoing
a.   Prepare documentation and a detailed project plan for the
     demolition of the pool.                                                   S

b.   Revisit the 2003 Archaeological Management Plan in-light of
     pool removal and formulate a detailed and revised plan as
     part of the pool removal, site rehabilitation and interpretaiton          S
     process.

c.   Formulate a landscape plan for the site for post-pool removal.
                                                                               S

d.   Revise the interpretation plan to include the gaol yard in-light
     of pool removal.                                                          S

e.   Continue to make the building available for Artist in Residence
     and other community based events/uses (as per gaol use and
                                                                              O
     artist in residence policies).

f.   Continue to undertake historical and archaeolgoical research
     on the site and related themes.                                          O

g.   Continue to seek funding for the overall Oatlands Gaol Master
     Plan through internal and external sources – particularly for the
     archaeological research and interpretation programs and                  O
     landscaping.

h.   Promote use of and access to the Gaoler’s Residence as per
     the use policy, and potentially as an adjunct of the Heritage
                                                                              O
     Hub project.

i.   Review the Oatlands Gaol Master Plan in-light of the new pool
     project and imminent demolition of the current pool.                     M

j.   Prepare documentation and a detailed project plan for the
     demolition of the pool.                                                   S




                                                                                             13

     Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023




                                         Oatlands
                                         Commissariat & 79
                                         High Street
      Previously endorsed                1827 & 1860/83
                                         The oldest public building in Oatlands
      documents and
      policy
                                        In 2012, Southern Midlands Council purchased 79 High Street,
         •   Oatlands Commissariat      Oatlands – an 1108 square metre parcel of land, containing the
             and 79 High Street         former Oatlands Commissariat Store, the Oatlands Guard
             Conservation               House archaeological site, and a c1870-1880s shop and
             Management Plan            cottage fronting High Street (see initiative 5).
         •   Oatlands Commissariat
             Master Plan 2013
         •   Southern Midlands          The commissariat is a large space in a very prominent position
             Integrated Heritage        relating to High Street and has the remains of a massive baker’s
             Skills Hub Project Plan    oven (c1880s) attached.           The building offers significant
             2015                       potential to create meaningful public space with
         •   Establishing a Social      supplementary interpretation and possible reinvigoration of the
             Enterprise at 79 High      baker’s oven. Such a use would link with the original use of the
             Street Oatlands            building – i.e. provisioning the town.
             “Heritage Hub”.
             September 2018.
                                        The site also has a high level of archaeological potential, being
                                        the site of the guard house (demolished c1975) of which
                                        substantial remains were found during an archaeological test-
                                        trenching program in 2013, also the military sundial, sentry box
                                        and the convict stocks




14

                             Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-23




4    Initiatives                                                        Short/Medium/
                                                                        Long-term or
                                                                        ongoing
a.   Implement, operate and review as required the Heritage Hub
     project plan(s) with view of maximising community use of and
     access to the site (further to the use policy) and the promotion         S
     of partnerships.

b.   Collaborate where possible with the Centre for Heritage at
     Oatlands as the key tenant for the site (further to the SMC-CfH
                                                                             O
     MOU) and the CfH business plan.

c.   Continue to seek to value-add to the interpretation of and
     research into the site.                                                 M

d.   Seek a partnership for ongoing use of the bakers oven in
     consultation with other site users.                                      S




                                                                                            15

     Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023




                                        Oatlands Supreme
                                        Court House
                                        1829
                                        The administrative heart of the colonial district


                                        The Oatlands Supreme Court House (1829) is owned by SMC
      Previously endorsed               and is one of the oldest Supreme Court Houses in Australia. It
      documents and                     is in remarkably original condition and offers significant
                                        potential for use as a facility to interpret the historic themes
      policy
                                        relevant to the Oatlands Military Precinct and associated
        •   Supreme Court House
                                        buildings. The building was acquired from the National Trust in
            Oatlands, Conservation      2007, although Council had tenure of the building since 2002.
            and Fabric Study 2003       With the building comes a collection of chattels (on loan from
                                        the National Trust), which derive from the 1910-1977 phase of
        •   Oatlands Supreme
                                        the building.
            Court House, Structural
            and Fabric Survey 2002
                                        Due to the intact nature of the building, an analysis of
        •   Oatlands Supreme
                                        building fabric was undertaken in 2003 in a bid to better
            Court House, &
                                        understand the building, and to plan future works. A
            Collections, Public
            Access and                  structural assessment was also undertaken in that year, which
            Interpretation Plan 2006    lead to a structural stabilisation and essential works program.
                                        Further non-essential works were undertaken in late 2008. In
        •   Oatlands Supreme
                                        2006 an interpretation and public access plan was
            Court House
            Interpretation Project –    developed with the aim of determining public perceptions of
            Implementation              what best the building could be used for, and to suggest
            Strategy 2008               interpretive themes and media which could effectively
                                        deliver the heritage significance.
        •   Oatlands Gaol and
            Supreme Court House
            Use Policy                  With a collection of objects associated with the Oatlands
                                        Court House (contents as well as archaeological artifacts), in
                                        2007 Council commissioned a preservation survey of the

16

                                  Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-23



collection and the locations proposed to store and display that collection.

With the development of the interpretation plan and the preservation survey, an
implementation strategy was developed to clarify minor conflict between those reports and
to guide the implementation of the first stages of interpretation. The first stages of the
interpretation plan have been implemented and the building is publicly accessible 7-days
per week as an ‘Oatlands Key’ venue. The building is also open for pre-booked tours and
special community events, as per the Oatlands Gaol and Supreme Court House Use Policy.

A small kitchen, equal-access toilet and storeroom have been constructed as a standalone
building to support volunteer and community use.




      5     Initiatives                                                       Short/Medium/
                                                                              Long-term or
                                                                              ongoing
      a.    Promote use of and access to the court house as per the use
            policy, and potentially as an adjunct of the Heritage Hub
                                                                                   O
            project.

      b.    Make available for community use as per the use policy.
                                                                                   O

      c.    Seek external funding to update and refresh interpretation as
            opportunities arise.                                                   M

      d.    Continue to foster partnerships with relevant stakeholders for
            the use of the building as a small museum and interpretation
                                                                                   O
            centre.




                                                                                                 17

     Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023




                                        Former Oatlands
                                        School (Roche Hall)
                                        1885
                                        The site of Oatlands first settlement



         Previously endorsed            Roche Hall, 73 High Street, Oatlands is the former Oatlands
         documents and                  State School property, comprising the 1885 Victorian-Gothic
                                        sandstone school building in the centre of Oatlands. In 2014,
         policy                         the Tasmanian Government divested ownership of the
                                        building to council and with recognition that the site has a
     •    Overview History of
                                        high level of community and social significance it is intended
          Oatlands State School 2013
                                        that the building be used for public purposes.
     •    Oatlands Barracks 1827,
          Archaeological Research
                                        Aside from the impressive building, the site itself is very
          Design 2013
                                        significant as an historic and archaeological site, having
                                        been the site of:

                                            -   Oatlands first settlement (1825)
                                            -   The first Oatlands Barracks and military parade ground
                                                (1827)
                                            -   The convict barracks from the construction of the gaol
                                                (1835)
                                            -   The Oatlands Probation Station (1839)
                                            -   The Oatlands Mechanic’s Institute (1850s)
                                            -   The first Oatlands public school (1850s)
                                            -   The Oatlands Area School (1885-c2000’s)




18

                                         Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-23



This archaeological significance was demonstrated by the 2012 summer archaeology program which
located substantial (shallow and largely intact) remains of the 1827 barracks. The building has a very
high level of community significance, having been the Oatlands State School within the living memory
of many locals.

The building comprises of four very large rooms, as well as foyers, large hallway, kitchenette and M&F
toilets. There are also large upstairs spaces which have been blocked off in the 1930s. The building is
currently used as council offices, the headquarters for Rural Alive and Well as well as housing Council’s
Landcare unit.

The front yard is used as landscaped public open space and the rear yard is parking. The Oatlands
Military Precinct interpretation trail begins in front of the building and three interpretive platforms are
installed on the site. Interpretation of the Oatlands Arch is to be installed as a condition of approval of
the recent arch relocation. The site is in a very strategic location for Council/public purposes, being in
the centre of the town, a large space with good access. This was recognised in the Oatlands
Integrated Development Strategy, which proposed the ‘Town Square’ principle, and a master
planning process for the site as part of a forthcoming Oatlands Structure Plan is a priority.




           6 Initiatives                                                          Short/Medium/
                                                                                  Long-term or
                                                                                  ongoing
           a.    Formulate a conservation management plan for the
                 building and site.                                                      S

           b.    Undertake a landscape master plan for the site which
                 considers the military parade ground, reinstatement of the
                 State School iron gates, archaeological remains and                     S
                 interpretation of the gaol arch.

           c.    Undertake essential maintenance to the building and seek
                 to undertake restoration work where possible (as guided by
                                                                                         O
                 the CMP).

           d.    Explore and promote the archaeological values of the site
                 through the Southern Midlands Historical Archaeology
                                                                                         M
                 Strategy.

           e     Utilise the building for council operations and other
                 community based organisations (e.g. RAW).                               O




                                                                                                              19

     Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023




                                        Oatlands Military
                                        Precinct
                                        1825-1859
                                        The Interior Capital of Van Diemens Land

                                        The area known as the Oatlands Military Precinct is the area
      Previously endorsed               bounded by High, Barrack, Church Streets and the
      documents and                     Esplanade, Oatlands – which is the centre of the town and is
                                        still the administrative centre of the Southern Midlands. It is in
      policy
                                        this area where the township was established in the early
         •   Oatlands Commissariat
                                        1820s, and by the 1840s it was the centre for what was to
             and 79 High Street         intended to become the interior capital of Van Diemens
             Conservation               Land. The precinct comprised of at least 30 buildings
             Management Plan            associated with the civil, government and convict
         •   Oatlands Commissariat      establishments, and was the longest operating military-lead
             Master Plan 2013           administrative precinct outside the major cities and
                                        secondary punishment stations in Van Diemens Land - being
                                        disbanded in the late 1850s.

                                        The Oatlands Military Precinct is unique, as it was established
                                        as the centre of what was to become a large city – which
                                        didn’t eventuate. The remnants of the precinct therefore
                                        have not been subject to as thorough destruction as the early
                                        remnants of those places which were to become cities.
                                        Seven buildings remain of this precinct, and the entire area
                                        has been demonstrated to be an area of extremely high
                                        archaeological potential which may offer vast knowledge
                                        about the formative processes of colonial military and civil
                                        establishments. The Oatlands Gaol and Court House are
                                        included within this precinct, and will be further detailed
                                        below.

20

                                   Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-23




Whilst SMC’s key focus is the restoration and management of the Council owned buildings
within the military precinct (as outlined above), some work on further understanding and
interpreting the precinct will be undertaken as a means of contextualising the buildings within
that precinct, and the precinct within the wider colonial administration.

Mechanisms for the protection of the archaeological resources of the precinct are also a key
consideration in the management of heritage values and work on understanding these
values has been undertaken both by council and the Tasmanian Heritage Council. Much of
the original precinct is still in government ownership.




      7     Initiatives                                                        Short/Medium/
                                                                               Long-term or
                                                                               ongoing
      a.    Continue to encourage research (historical and archaeo-
            logical) into the Oatlands Military Precinct to gain a better
                                                                                     O
            understanding of layout, physical remains and overall context.

      b.    Further develop interpretive media for the Oatlands Military
            Precinct for incorporation into related interpretation projects.         O




                                                                                                  21

     Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023




                                         Southern Midlands
                                         Convict Sites
                                         Building the district

                                         It has long been recognised that the Southern Midlands has
     Previously endorsed                 a wealth of convict heritage, spread throughout the
                                         municipal area. No less than 12 of the 80 known convict
     documents and                       Probation Station are located in the municipal area as well as
     policy                              at least 10 other road, timber and bridge party stations etc. In
      •   Southern Midlands Convict      addition, there are a number of other convict sites, ranging
          Sites Research Project 2013-   from watch-houses, police infrastructure, work sites etc. The
          14                             convict probation system is unique to Tasmania and is a key
                                         part of the state’s contribution to the world heritage listing of
      •   Archaeological research
          designs and reports on         Australian convict sites.
          Oatlands, Green Ponds
          Picton, Lovely Banks and       During 2013-14 a major research project was undertaken to
          Spring Hill Probations/Road
          stations (some
                                         identify, locate, research and document Southern Midlands
          forthcoming).                  Convict sites. This culminated in a 20-page booklet and a
                                         substantial collection of data on these important sites. An
                                         exhibition was curated and interpretive installations were
                                         erected on several sites.

                                         This research has endless possibilities for further analysis and
                                         potential for developing media and experiences reaching
                                         throughout the region (and indeed inter-regional linkages, i.e.
                                         the Convict Trail) as well as supporting the management and
                                         protection of these sites into the future.

                                         With the world heritage listing of Australian convict sites,
                                         Southern Midlands sites have the potential to reap benefit

22

                                       Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-23



from an increased interest and knowledge of these sites, and being positioned in central Tasmania
on a route used to traverse between these sites, is seen as a substantial opportunity.

The Convict Archaeology of the Southern Midlands project - a collaborative archaeological and
research project (with an education component) with the University of Tasmania is to be piloted in
2019 with the view of an annual project (see also Initiative 9).




       8     Initiatives                                                              Short/Medium/
                                                                                      Long-term or
                                                                                      ongoing
       a.    Continue to investigate, document and promote the convict
             heritage of the Southern Midlands where opportunities arise.                  O

       b.    Encourage and foster partnerships with other institutions for the
             investigation and promotion of the convict heritage of the
                                                                                           O
             Southern Midlands.

       c.    Explore possibilities for multimedia interpretation of convict
             sites, in particular those that are difficult to access or have little
                                                                                           O
             above-ground remains.




                                                                                                      23

     Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023




                                        Archaeology
                                        Program
                                        Unlocking the hidden heritage of the district
                                        Between 2011 and 2013 Council ran a 2-3-week summer
      Previously endorsed               archaeology program based at Oatlands which, in
      documents and                     conjunction with the Heritage Education and Skills Centre,
                                        aimed to partner with various universities to offer a range of
      policy
                                        archaeological management experience to graduate and
         •   Oatlands Gaol
                                        undergraduate students.
             Archaeological             The model of each season is to train 12-15 volunteer students,
             Management Plan
                                        utilising council heritage staff and 2-3 volunteer professional
             2003.
                                        archaeologists and undertake excavations on at least three
         •   Archaeological             sites and survey on several sites during the three-week
             research designs for:
                                        program. Permits are gained, and research design and
             Oatlands Gaol,
             Callington Mill, Green     planning are undertaken ahead of each program and
             Ponds Watch House,         students gain experience in planning, excavation, survey,
             Oatlands Barracks,         reporting and artifact management.
             Oatlands Guard House ,
             Picton Road Station et.    A public archaeology program is run alongside each season,
             al.                        culminating in an open day which attracts 500 people.

                                        Students are invited to submit proposals for follow-up projects
                                        and publications and several postgraduate theses have
                                        been done on Southern Midlands subjects.

                                        In addition (in collaboration with Arts Tasmania) a model has
                                        been formulated for student work-experience in collection
                                        management and curatorship.




24

                                        Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-23




The program has been on-hold since 2013 in order to deal with a backlog of reporting and curatorial
requirements, which as of 2018 is largely up-to-date and the program will recommence as part of the
Convict Archaeology of the Southern Midlands (see Initiative 8).

Whilst the excavation and research program has been somewhat ad-hoc to date, largely responding
to works-driven archaeological needs, it is recognised that a comprehensive Southern Midlands
Historical Archaeology Strategy is required in order to guide the future of the program through detailed
research agendas, better understanding of resources and site significance and to set a more strategic
direction for the program.




         9     Initiatives                                                        Short/Medium/
                                                                                  Long-term or
                                                                                  ongoing
         a.    Formulate a Southern Midlands Historical Archaeology Strategy
               which sets initiatives, priorities and a research/works agenda
                                                                                        S
               for the next 5 years.


         b.    Review and implement the Oatlands Gaol Archaeological
               Management Plan as a priority in the redevelopment of that
                                                                                        S
               site post-pool removal.

         c.    Contiue to facilitate public archaeology programs including
               an annual summer archaeology fieldschool in conjunction
                                                                                        O
               relevant education partners.

         d.    Populate the archaeology schedule of the Southern Midlands
               Planning Scheme in order to offer adequate protection to
               important archaeological sites (as informed by the Southern              M
               Midlands Historical Archaeology Strategy).


         e.    Encourage external researchers to utilise the archaeological
               resources (e.g. research, sites and collections) of the Southern
                                                                                        O
               Midlands (as guided by the historical archaeology strategy).




                                                                                                           25

     Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023




                                         Green Ponds
                                         Watch House
                                         1847
                                         A Modern adaptation of a significant ruin

                                         The Green Ponds Watch House was constructed in 1847 to a
                                         design by Colonial Architect William Porden Kay, adjacent to
      Previously endorsed                the Green Ponds Police Office (now SMC Kempton Council
      documents and                      Offices). In the 1860s, the Kempton Council Chambers were
                                         built between the two buildings. The watch house was largely
      policy
                                         demolished in the late 1930s with only the former men’s lockup
      •    Green Ponds Watch House
                                         retained and used for the next 80 years as a storage shed. In
           Conservation Brief 2008.      2010, council undertook a refurbishment of the building,
                                         reinstating the original roof pitch and juxtaposing old and new
      •    Kempton Council Offices       to form a contemporary space within the former ruin. Located
           Archaeological
           Management Plan 2008.         next to the council offices, this space is intended for community
                                         use.




       10       Initiatives                                                                Short/Medium/
                                                                                           Long-term or
                                                                                           ongoing
          a.    Encourage community use of the building for temporary exhibitions,
                workshops, meetings etc.                                                         O




26

                                      Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-23




                                     Public Building
                                     Management
                                     Community owned spaces and places

                                    Council   owns   a   substantial   portfolio   of   public   and
                                    administrative heritage buildings, including the Oatlands and
                                    Kempton Council Chambers and several small community
Previously endorsed                 halls which are on the local (and sometimes state) heritage
documents and                       registers.
policy
                                    These still serve an active public function and are vital parts
•   The Southern Midlands           of their respective communities. Whilst their functional
    Community Heritage Archive      management is part of other Council departments, the
    Project has provided a useful   management of their heritage values rests with the Heritage
    basis for further public
    engagement on local halls.      Projects program and these buildings also offer potential for
                                    public engagement on their heritage values.



        11       Initiatives                                                       Short/Medium/
                                                                                   Long-term or
                                                                                   ongoing
         a.      Formulate a conservation management plan for the Oatlands
                 Council Chambers                                                         S

         b.      Seek opportunity to undertake interpretation and public
                 engagement projects at heritage halls (etc.) owned by
                                                                                         O
                 Council.




                                                                                                       27

     Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023




                                        Chauncy Vale
                                        Natural and cultural heritage


                                        Bequeathed to the former Brighton Council by Mr. Anton
                                        Chauncy (husband of writer Nan Chauncy, nee Masterman)
                                        in 1988, and assumed by Southern Midlands Council after
                                        1993 amalgamations, the Chauncy Vale Wildlife Sanctuary is
                                        a 380-hectare (plus other incorporated nature reserves,
      Previously endorsed               public and private) reserve, just east of Bagdad. The house
      documents and                     and home paddock of Chauncy Vale was later gifted to
      policy                            Council by Anton’s daughter, Heather Chauncy. A sub-
                                        committee of Council, the Chauncy Vale Management
         •   Chauncy Vale Wildlife      Committee, manages the reserve under the gazetted
             Sanctuary and Flat         Chauncy Vale Management Plan. Council has an endorsed
             Rock Reserve Bagdad.       business plan for the reserve, and support is provided by the
             Joint Management Plan
             2010.                      Friends of Chauncy Vale Inc. The sanctuary includes vast
                                        tracts of natural bush, several caves, as well as the Day Dawn
                                        cottage, home of the Chauncy/Masterman family from 1918
                                        to 1988. Day Dawn Cottage is perhaps the earliest example
                                        of formed concrete domestic architecture in Tasmania.
                                        Section 1.2 of the management plan states that one of the
                                        purposes of the plan is to:

                                              a) provide for the conservation of the cultural and
                                              natural environment of Chauncy Vale

                                        Further, the State’s roles and responsibilities of Southern
                                        Midlands Council in the management of Chauncy Vale
                                        includes:




28

                                  Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-23




      b) restore and maintain the Chauncy house, insure the house and any
      material lent for display, and develop a heritage program through its
      Chauncy Vale Management Committee.
      c) undertake, through its Management Committee, heritage research,
      interpretation and education programs on its behalf subject both to
      adherence with the principles of the ICOMOS Burra Charter, as well as
      the input of a professional archaeologist where necessary.

The wishes of Anton Chauncy, as endorsed by his daughter Heather, included that:

      c) the house, garden, and small garden, known as ‘the shrine’ be maintained together
      with a display of Nan Chauncy’s work in the house.

The above purposes, responsibilities and wishes translate into the objectives of the
management plan, which provide detail on the conservation, protection and promotion of
the natural and cultural heritage values of Chauncy Vale. Of particular relevance to the
Southern Midlands Historic Heritage Strategy 2009-14, is the conservation of the Day Dawn
Cottage, the earlier Cherry Tree Cottage site, as well as the associated gardens and movable
cultural heritage.

In line with the management plan and the proposals contained therein (Section 4.4.2), and
in consultation with the management committee and Friends of Chauncy Vale Inc. the
following strategies should be pursued:




       12 Initiatives                                                       Short/Medium/
                                                                            Long-term or
                                                                            ongoing
        a.     Review the Joint Management Plan 2010 and Statutory
               Management Plan 1993.                                              S

        b.     Develop a conservation management plan for Day Dawn
               Cottage, inclusive of timeframes and resourcing
                                                                                  M
               requirements.




                                                                                                 29

     Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023




                                        Horse-Drawn
                                        Heritage
                                        The public transport of yesteryear


     Council is the custodian of a collection of horse drawn carriages and associated equipment,
     some of which is owned by council and some is on long-term loan from the family of a benefactor
     who vested a collection into council’s care. A purpose-built faculty has been constructed on the
     property adjoining the Kempton Recreation ground and a part of the collection is stored and
     displayed in that building.


     The horse drawn heritage initiative is being progressed by a sub-committee of the Green Ponds
     Progress Association. A memorandum of understanding has been entered into with that
     organisation which identifies a future development plan for the property within which the facility
     is constructed. The equipment is used occasionally for special events and there are plans to
     eventually open the facility for public visitation.



          13 Initiatives                                                             Short/Medium/
                                                                                     Long-term or
                                                                                     ongoing
           a.     Continue to work with the Green Ponds Progress Association
                  sub-committee to support the development of future plans for
                                                                                           O
                  the facility and collection.

           b.     Scope opportunities for promoting the historic coaching industry
                  with other towns/sites along the Heritage Highway.                       O




30

                                  Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-23




                                  Streetscapes and
                                  Landscapes
                                  Step back to another time


                                  Council and the residents of Southern Midlands take great
    Previously endorsed           pride in the heritage landscapes and streetscapes of the
    documents and                 region, in particular the streetscapes of heritage villages.
    policy                        Substantial projects have been undertaken over the years on
                                  streetscape improvement in all towns – the obvious being the
•    Oatlands Streetscape Study
                                  undergrounding of power lines in Oatlands (coupled with
     1997.
                                  street signage, paving/kerbing and lighting projects). Towns
•    Kempton Streetscape Study    such as Kempton feature interpretive ‘gateway’ entry
     1997.                        statements and the notable topiary project of Oatlands aims
•    Southern Midlands Heritage
                                  to perpetuate the historic topiaries of the St Peters Pass area.
     Project (vol.3). Cultural
     Landscapes and Tourism
     Opportunities 2007.          An important principle to note, which is key to council’s
•                                 decision-making processes, is that the historic towns of the
                                  district need to remain as ‘livable’ towns – and that the
                                  careful evolution of townscape character is needed to
                                  ensure the livability of the townships – planning scheme
                                  provisions are designed to reach that balance. Also, council
                                  is well aware of the ‘overdoing’ principles of heritage
                                  streetscape/townscape management and care is taken to
                                  not to ensure that organically evolved heritage character is
                                  not falsely represented in an ‘over-prettied’ streetscape.




                                                                                                     31

Important partnerships have been established between council and authorities such as Aurora
energy so that careful consideration is given to minimising (and indeed undoing) the heritage
impact that utility lines (for instance) can have on streetscape values.

In the mid-1990s, a tourism study lamented that the landscape of the midlands was ‘one of the most
uninteresting in Tasmania’. This notion was countered in the 2007 Southern Midlands Heritage
Project, which articulated the significant evidence of thousands of years of human occupation
evident in the cultural landscape of the Southern Midlands and the cultural heritage values inherent
in such.


  14      Initiatives                                                                  Short/Medium/
                                                                                       Long-term or
                                                                                       ongoing
   a.     Continue to foster partnerships with utility companies for methods to
          minimise/undo installations which have an unnecessary negative
                                                                                            O
          impact upon heritage streetscape/ townscapes.

   b.     Monitor opportunities for funding for the implementation of initiatives
          to reduce/undo streetscape elements which have unnecessary
                                                                                            O
          impact upon heritage streetscape/ townscapes.

   c.     A working group consisting of council and community members to
          progress the Kempton Streetscape Plan.                                             S

   d.     Initiate a process of identification of significant trees and plantings in
          public areas of the municipal area and consider
                                                                                             S
          management/statutory protection options.

                                  Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023




                                  Heritage
                                  Collections
                                  Small connections with the past

                                  Council holds a substantial collection of heritage items,
                                  including:

Previously endorsed                   -   Archaeological artifacts
documents and                         -   Corporate items (e.g. photographs, awards)
policy                                -   Agricultural implements
                                      -   Architectural and interior decoration samples.
•   Kempton Council
    Collections 2003              In 2007 Council adopted a heritage collections policy and a
                                  key objective of the Heritage Officer position is to manage
•   Oatlands Gaol and Court       that collection and utilise it for display and research. A
    House Preservation Survey
    2007                          substantial database has been populated and steps have
                                  been taken to establish (and then increase) the online
•   Southern Midlands Council     presence of the collection.
    Heritage Collections Policy

•   Various procedures            Part of the Oatlands Gaoler’s Residence has been fitted as
    manuals pursuant to the       a collections store and there are ad-hoc storage facilities in
    SMC collections policy (in    several other buildings, which is far from ideal. A vision of the
    development)
                                  Midlands Economic Development and Land Use Strategy is
                                  to seek to establish a purpose-built/fitted facility for the
                                  collection which may also have commercial opportunities
                                  for storage or research.

                                  Collaboration with the heritage Education and Skills Centre
                                  on research projects utilising the collection is also desired.




                                                                                                      33

     Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023




        15 Initiatives                                                                  Short/Medium/
                                                                                        Long-term or
                                                                                        ongoing
         a.   Continue to refine, audit and implement heritage collection
              procedures further to council’s heritage collection policy.                    O

         b.   Establish an industry standard collection store to house council’s
              heritage collection.                                                            S

         c.   Ensure that all heritage collection display spaces are adequate and
              appropriate for their purpose.                                                 O

         d.   Continue to utilise council’s heritage collection for research,
              publication and display.                                                       O

         e.   Continue partnerships with relevant agencies/groups/individuals with
              an interest in heritage collections.                                           O

         f.   Continue to pursue online availability of heritage collection data as a
              priority.                                                                      O

         g.   Undertake a feasibility study and seek to establish a ‘commercial’
              heritage/archaeological collections store to house council’s
              collection and to offer collection management services to others on a           S
              for-profit basis.

         h.   Continue to support the Tasmanian Decorated Interiors initiative in
              collaboration with relevant partners.                                          O




34

                                  Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023




                                  Heritage Education &
                                  Public Engagement
                                  Communicating our heritage

                                    Where possible, SMC’s Heritage Projects team integrates
                                    student and community education programs in heritage
                                    projects as a means of:
Previously endorsed
documents and                              •   Disseminating heritage information to the wider
policy                                         community
                                           •   Assisting the community to understand, protect
•   Oatlands Commissariat and                  and promote their local heritage
    79 High Street Conservation            •   Encouraging the interest of students and
    Management Plan                            researchers to utilise the heritage resources of the
•   Southern Midlands Council
                                               Southern Midlands
    Arts Strategy 2012.
                                    Examples of successful heritage education projects by
                                    SMC include regular school involvement, collaboration
                                    with the Heritage Education and Skills Centre, U3A
                                    lectures, National Trust Heritage Festival events and the
                                    new and very successful Heritage and Bullock Festival.




                                                                                                      35

     Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023


          16 Initiatives                                                               Short/Medium/
                                                                                       Long-term or
                                                                                       ongoing
           a.   Continue to develop and stage education and public programs
                attached to heritage projects, in particular the archaeology
                                                                                            O
                summer program and the Artist in Residence program.

           b.   Work with the Heritage Education and Skills Centre to promote the
                heritage of the Southern Midlands in wider heritage education and
                                                                                            O
                skills programs.

           c.   Where possible, assist students and researchers investigate and
                promote the heritage of the Southern Midlands                               O

           d.   When possible, include Southern Midlands activities in wider
                heritage ‘festival’ programs such as the National Trust Heritage
                                                                                            M
                Festival, National Archaeology Week etc.

           e.   Work with local schools to include heritage themes into curriculum.
                                                                                            O
           f.   Consider the development of a research bursary scheme where
                value for money to council can be demonstrated in the support of
                                                                                             S
                undergaduate and postgraduate students.

           g.   Engage the public wherever possible in the planning and
                implementation of heritage projects.                                        O

           h.   Work with community groups to stage the annual Heritage and
                Bullock Festival at Oatlands                                                O

           i.   Stage an event in commemmoration of the 200th anniversay of the
                founding of Oatlands and Macquarie’s second visit.                          M

           k.   Enhance and improve existing interpetation to increase linkages
                between heritage sites and improve visitor experiences.                     O

           l.   Seek opportunities for publications regarding Southern Midlands
                heritage. Annual KPI’s to include:
                   - 4 short publications                                                   O
                   - 1 major ‘monograph’ as part of an ongoing series
                   - Monthly news articles in local media

          m.    Work with property owners who volunteer to particpate in an annual
                ‘open doors’ event allowing access to buildings not ordinarily open.        O


36

                                  Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023




                                   Heritage Tourism
                                   Promoting and sharing our heritage

                                   The Tourism Tasmania Historic Heritage Strategy 2012-2015
                                   summarised the appeal of historic heritage tourism in Tasmania:


                                         Visitors to Tasmania are immersed in historic heritage; it’s
                                         part of everyday life and the strong sense of place that is
Previously endorsed                      Tasmania.
documents and
                                         Historic heritage permeates the experiences of visitors to
policy                                   Tasmania, whether as a backdrop, a setting or a direct
                                         experience and combines with the state’s other
•   Callington Mill Master Plan          characteristic experiences of nature, adventure, food and
    2007                                 wine to provide rich multi-layered experiences.

•   Southern Midlands Heritage
                                         Tasmania has conserved the buildings, precincts and
    Project (vol.3). Cultural
    Landscapes and Tourism               townships of different historic periods, particularly colonial
    Opportunities 2007.                  times. Many are in their original setting without modern
                                         intrusions and still in use within the community.
•   Oatlands Identity,
    Guidelines for Usage 2009            Traditions and stories from the past are strong in Tasmanian
                                         communities where Tasmanian families descended from
•   Midlands Economic                    convict and colonial settlers still live. Records of the past
    Development and Land
                                         and movable heritage items are quite readily available
    Use Strategy. SGS
    Economics & Planning 2014.           and well conserved with many in displays and museums.

•   Submission to the
    Tasmanian Legislative          Council concurs with that summary, however recognises that
    Enquiry into Built Heritage    historic heritage is not necessarily a static occurrence that will
    Tourism in Tasmania 2015.
                                   draw visitors without some form of captivating and dynamic
                                   engagement tools to enhance the experience.




                                                                                                          37

     Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023




     Whilst it is obvious that the Southern Midlands has a wealth of historic cultural heritage sites, both
     privately and publicly owned, which have the potential to be integrated into tourism initiatives, a
     strategic approach to the promotion and interpretation of these sites is required. It is recognised
     that an unplanned and ad-hoc approach to heritage place interpretation is rarely beneficial, and
     that careful planning is required to deliver a quality experience linked to wider initiatives – both
     geographically and thematically. Uniformity in branding, alignment with statewide strategies and
     meaningful well-planned delivery is essential.

     The appeal of heritage tourism is demonstrated by the increase in visitation to Oatlands between
     2009-2012. The number of visitor nights in Oatlands increased from 4,300 nights in 2009 to 8,100 nights
     in 2010 (the year of the Callington Mill opening) – substantially above the state average growth. In
     2011, visitation increased to 15,100 nights p.a. (i.e. fourfold in three years). This demonstrates the
     appeal of heritage as a tourism asset. In 2009, the Tasmanian Tourism Industry Council engaged
     EMRS to conduct a phone survey of 1,000 Tasmanians to determine what they thought the key
     economic mainstay of Tasmania was. EMRS summarised that

            Public perceptions in the 2009 survey are again that tourism has not only made the
            greatest contribution to Tasmania’s growth in the past 5 years, but also that it has the
            potential to do so during the next 5 years.

     Despite the recent closure of the Central Tasmanian Tourism Centre, Council can still play a lead
     role in the heritage tourism. In terms of built heritage tourism, as summarised above, the Southern
     Midlands has plenty to offer and the statistics above demonstrate that the management and
     promotion of such is effective. An independently formulated vision statement for the Southern
     Midlands (SGC Economics, 2014) included the following statement:

            Apart from agriculture, there are other areas of potential growth and development.
            The municipality has a rich history and offers a wealth of heritage buildings and
            landscapes. This is an important part of the region’s identity and a key driver of the
            local tourism industry. Council has shown leadership by taking business initiative.

     Council sees linkages and partnerships as a key contributor to the success of built heritage tourism
     in the region, with a long-standing association with organisations such as the Heritage Highway
     Tourism Association and the Beacons project as examples of the need for a local government to
     think outside their own boundaries in order to maximise exposure to a wide market.




38

                            Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023




17 Initiatives                                                                Short/Medium/
                                                                              Long-term or
                                                                              ongoing
a.   Better identify those places within Southern Midlands which have
     the potential for integration into heritage tourism initiatives – both
     geographically and thematically, with a particular focus on                    S
     publicly owned sites.

b.   Continue to foster an alignment to statewide heritage tourism
     strategies and principles.                                                    O

c.   Ensure that the interpretation of Southern Midlands heritage
     places is modern, dynamic, unique and memorable.                              O

d.   Seek linkages and cooperative heritage tourism projects with
     other Councils within the sub-region.                                         O

e.   Promote the use of council owned heritage sites in regional and
     statewide events/festivals (even if not heritage focussed).                   O

f.   Continue to implement and review consistent branding in all
     SMC heritage tourism initiatives.                                             O

g    Seek to work collaboritvely with local tourism operators to
     maximise the inclusion of meaningful heritage experiences and
                                                                                   O
     messages into their operations/branding etc.

h    Monitor, review and seek opportunitues for expansion of the
     ‘Oatlands Key’ system.                                                        O




                                                                                              39

     Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023




                                         Partnerships
                                         Promoting a network of people reaching for a
                                         common goal



     Council recognises that there are countless heritage/ culture/arts interest groups and individuals
     within (and outside of) Tasmania who have an interest in the Southern Midlands and other
     common heritage themes. It is the intent of council to wherever possible work with such groups

     towards the common goal of researching, preserving and promoting the heritage values of the
     region.
     Within the region there are a number of heritage groups who provide valuable services and
     support to the public in promoting and preserving the heritage of the region, these include the
     various local historical societies, small museums and individuals.
     Initiatives such as the Centre for Heritage at Oatlands, and the Heritage Hub have a primary
     mandate to engage with and collaborate with partner groups.




40

                           Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage Strategy 2019-2023




18 Initiatives                                                           Short/Medium/
                                                                         Long-term or
                                                                         ongoing
a.   Provide support wherever possible for groups and individuals with
     an interest in the heritage of the Southern Midlands.
                                                                              O


b.   Work with agencies such as the Tasmanian Heritage Council,
     National Trust, Heritage Tasmania, Destination Southern
     Tasmania, Tourism Tasmania, TMAG/QVMAG etc. on the
                                                                              O
     management of heritage within the Southern Midlands and/or
     related themes.

c.   Collaborate whererver possible with the Centre for Heritage at
     Oatlands (Heritage Education and Skills Centre) on initiatves of
                                                                              O
     mutual interest.

d.   Promote intra-council collaboration on heritage/arts/cultural
     projects through other council strategiues such as the Arts
                                                                              O
     Strategy etc.




                                                                                            41

Review of the strategy & reporting
It is intended that the Southern Midlands Council Historic
Heritage Strategy be reviewed should any circumstance
result in any major changes to the heritage program of the
framework in which it operates.


A monthly report to council via the Manager Heritage
Projects report is to monitor and report upon progress of
implementing this strategy.


An annual report on the achievements against this strategy is
to be provided to council and any interested stakeholders
(and published on council’s website).




Brad Williams – Manager Heritage Projects – October 2018.




                                           Southern Midlands Council
                                           Heritage Program
                                           Oatlands Gaoler’s Residence
                                           Mason Street
                                           OATLANDS TAS 7120
                                           62545000
                                           smc@southernmidlands.tas.gov.au
                                           www.southernmidlands.tas.gov.au/heritage/

