a fF > \ ~
SSS ER
S a 2 Ri 4 a
= as ‘ y a ; : j aoe
SOUTHERN
MIDLANDS
COUNCIL
Southern Midlands Council
Historic Heritage Strategy
2014-2018
Summary of Progress Against key Initiatives, October 2018
Brad Williams — Manager Heritage Projects
 ° Short/Medium
1 Statutory Heritage eerie OO
; Progress against the initiative during 2014-18 | Consequent broad strategy for 2018-23
Management “=
a. Update the Southern Midlands Council The Southern Midlands Interim Planning The 2018-23 strategy is to include the
Historic Heritage Strategy 2014-18 to Scheme 2015 is in place, however the broadly foreshadowed tenor of the
reflect the provisions of the new enactment of the Tasmanian Planning Tasmanian Planning Scheme if possible.
Southern Midlands Planning Scheme Scheme is imminent and therefore this has
once the scheme is in-place. S not yet been updated. Continue this strategy as required.
A formal internal heritage referrals
process has been put in-place for the
assessment of development on heritage
places.
b. Continue to participate in relevant Council officers have continued to be Continue this strategy as required.
legislative review processes or relevance involved with consultation for legislative
to historic and aboriginal heritage review, including the amendments to the
management. O Historic Cultural Heritage Act, Aboriginal
Heritage Act, Legislative Council Enquiry
into Historic Heritage Tourism etc.
C. Ensure that historic heritage is The MEDALS strategy has included a range Continue this strategy as required.
considered in the Midlands Economic of heritage initiatives and is currently
Development and Land Use Strategy S being implemented as opportunities arise.
process and other strategic planning
documents as they progress.
 d. Explore resource sharing with other Resource sharing of SMC heritage staff has Continue this strategy as required.
councils for effective and consistent been occurring on a cost-recovery basis as
statutory heritage management. O required and feasible with councils such as

Derwent Valley, Brighton and Glamorgan
Spring Bay.

e, Develop ‘practice notes’ and other This initiative has not been pursued by Work collaboratively with the Centre for
advice for heritage property owners to SMC directly as it is an initiative identified | Heritage (HESC) to pursue such initiatives.
assist in managing the values of their O in the Centre for Heritage Business Plan.
properties.

f. Liaise with Aboriginal Heritage Tasmania SMC heritage staff participated in the With the review of the Aboriginal Heritage
for more effective and comprehensive review process for the Aboriginal Relics Act now complete, pursue this initiative.
systems for managing Aboriginal 0 Act 1975 as it transitioned to the
heritage values in the Southern Aboriginal Heritage Act.

Midlands.
 ° : Short/Medium

2 Ca | | | ngto Nn M | | | eeern or Progress against the initiative during 2014-18 | Consequent broad strategy for 2018-23

ongoing

a. Review and update the Not pursued. Council has resolved to sub-lease Callington
interpretation media for Callington Mill to a private individual from 2019.

mill, including inclusion of Whilst Council will still have a role as
interpretaiton on the steam mill, O ‘landlord’ and with maintenance of the site,
non-English media and interpretation an active management role will no longer
focussed at children. occur.

b. Develop the front portion of the The stables have been used for temporary Upholding the maintenance program for
stables as a temporary exhibition exhibitions, however focus has been on the mill and wider site is to remain in the
space for community use. S the installation of the blacksmith’s future historic heritage strategy.

initiative in the cart-house of the stables.

C. Finalise any outstanding heritage These have been completed in the 2014-
aspects of the Callington Mill Master S 18 period.
Plan and Precinct Plan/Strategy.
 Short/Medium

3 Oat | dn d S G da ol eeern or Progress against the initiative during 2014-18 | Consequent broad strategy for 2018-23

ongoing

a. Continue to seek funding for the Funding has been secured for the new Implement the pool project plan for the
relocation of the swimming pool. pool facility, planning permit is in place relocation of the pool from the gaol site.

S and site preparation works have
commenced.

b. Finalise the implementation of the The interpretation plan has been finalised | Further interpretation planning will need to
Oatlands Gaol Interpretation plan. S and public access facilitated by way of the |= occur as part of the implementation of the

‘Oatlands Key’ system. Master Plan with the removal of the pool.

C. Continue to make the building The Artist in Residence program has Continue the Artist in Residence program
available for Artist in Residence proven to be very successful, with an in-line with the policy.
and other cummunity based average of 6 artist per year using the
events/uses (as per development 0 facilities. An Artist in Residence Policy has
plan and use policy). been adopted to guide this process and to

facilitate Council’s acquisition of an art
collection.

d. Continue to undertake historical Research on the gaol and related themes Continue research on an as-needs basis,
and archaeolgoical research on the has been undertaken on an as-needs particularly with further interpretation
site and related themes. basis. planning and the monograph series.

O A ‘monograph series’ telling stories that Formulate an archaeological management
will included stories of the gaol and plan for the site post-pool demolition.
personalities is being planned.
 e, Continue to seek funding for the No major funds have been attracted to the Funding will need to be sought for post-
overall Oatlands Gaol project Gaol during this reporting period, with the | demolition of the pool and implementation
through internal and external 0 exception of the site being part of the of the remaining initiatives of the
sources. Oatlands Heritage Sites Access (i.e. master/interpretation plans as well as the

Oatlands Key) Project. forthcoming archaeological management
plan.

f. Scope business opportunities for The gaol is being used as a site which is Ensure that the gaol is part of the suite of
the long-term sustainable use of adjunct to the 79 High Street ‘Heritage Oatlands heritage buildings promoted as an
the Oatlands Gaol, in-line with 0 Hub’ initiative — which is currently in its adjunct of the Heritage Hub project.
other local and multi-regional infancy.
heritage and tourism initiatives

g. Develop a detailed archaeological Not progressed. To be progressed as a matter of urgency
management strategy and now funding has been sourced for the new
landscape/use plan with the Vv pool and demolition of the existing pool is
assumption that the pool will imminent.
eventually be removed.

h. Seek council endorsement of the The Oatlands Gaol Master Plan was Review the Oatlands Gaol Master Plan in-
concept and continue to refine the endorsed in 2013 and a review has not yet _ light of the new pool project and imminent
master plan/end-use plan based on been considered necessary. demolition of the current pool.
the current broad concepts for a M
heritage, trades, archaeology &
museum skills centre.

i. Relocate the swimming pool and As per above, the new pool has been Devise the landscape plan as informed by
implement the landscape plan. M funded and planning approval gained. Itis the archaeological management plan.
 expected that the current pool will be
decommissioned in April 2020.
j. Implement the refined long term Not progressed. Review the Oatlands Gaol Master Plan in-
for a heritage, trades, archaeology 7 light of the commissariat project and
& museum skills centre with occupation of that site by the Heritage
maximised public use and access. Education and Skills Centre.
 4 Oatlands ceectomon
; Progress against the initiative during 2014-18 Consequent broad strategy for 2018-23
Commissariat “=

a. Make safe the site and S With substantial funding through the The commissariat will be largely operated

weatherproof the buildings. Australian Government’s National Stronger by HESC as per the Centre for Heritage
Regions Fund, the commissariat has been Business Plan, however opportunity exists

b. Seek funding opportunities through fully restored as the headquarters for the for shared use via a memorandum of
internal and external sources O Centre For Heritage at Oatlands. understanding between CfH and SMC.

Cc. Seek opportunities to use the place A Mou is in-place for HESC to utilise the In particular the oven may be used for
as a training site in conjunction with commissariat as per the Centre for commercial or community purposes.
the Heritage Education and Skills O Heritage Business Plan.

Centre.

d. Explore partnership opportunities The ‘Heritage Hub’ project will include the | Oversee the social enterprise and seek
with relevant stakeholders/interest possibility of partnerships and shared use opportunities to expand and value-add.
groups. 0 of the Commissariat (with HESC as the Assist the Centre for Heritage where

priority tenant) — in particular for use of possible to achieve common objectives.
the oven.

e, Implement the recommendations of The conservation management plan has Continued maintenance of the site and
the CMP to return the place to a been fully implemented. seeking opportunities for external funding
habitable state (undertaking short S-M for value-add projects.
and medium term works at least).
 f. Develop an interpretation plan for An interpretation plan is currently being Seek opportunities for external funding for
the site, which considers fit with developed for the site. Basic value-adding interpretation projects.
other local and state M interpretation to be installed by end of
heritage/tourism initiatives. 2018.

g. Scope business opportunities for The use and operation of the commissariat Oversee the social enterprise and seek
the long-term sustainable use of the has been aligned with the Centre for opportunities to expand and value-add.
commissariat (possibly Heritage Business Plan and a social Assist the Centre for Heritage where
incorporating the shop and Vv enterprise business plan isin place forthe | possible to achieve common objectives.
cottage), in-line with other local and shop and cottage building.
multi-regional heritage and tourism
Initiatives.

h. Establish an adaptive reuse for the As per above the conservation
building, maximising public access management plan has been implemented
and appreciation of heritage values and a range of business plans are in place.
as part of the suite of early colonial
administrative buildings at Oatlands Vv
— with full implementation of the
recommendations of the
conservation management,
interpretation and business plans.
 ° Short/Medium

5 19 H Is h St reet eeern or Progress against the initiative during 2014-18 | Consequent broad strategy for 2018-23

ongoing

a. Make safe the site and With substantial funding through the Implement the social enterprise business
weatherproof the building. S Australian Government’s National Stronger _ plan.

Regions Fund, the conservation

b. Seek funding opportunities through management plan for the shop/cottage
internal and external sources O has been fully implemented.

C. Seek opportunities to use the place The shop/cottage will be used as a social Oversee the social enterprise and seek
as a training site in conjunction with enterprise/community co-op as per an opportunities to expand and value-add.
the Heritage Education and Skills O endorsed business plan. This has the Assist the Centre for Heritage where
Centre. potential for co-branding with HESC. possible to achieve common objectives

d. Explore partnership opportunities Partnerships are a key element of the Implement the social enterprise business
with relevant stakeholders/interest 0 social enterprise business plan for the site. plan.
groups.

e, Implement the recommendations of See above
the CMP to return the place to a
habitable state (undertaking short S-M
and medium term works at least).

f. Explore opportunities for use of the See above
building as ancillary space in
support of the end-use of the Vv
commissariat, or other commercial
ventures (including possible
privatisation)
 5 Oatlands Supreme jens
; Progress against the initiative during 2014-18 | Consequent broad strategy for 2018-23
Court House _—

a. Establish a volunteer staffing Whilst the contribution of volunteers is Continue to seek opportunities to staff and
program to open the building at acknowledged, a volunteer staffing open the building — particularly aligned with
least 4 days per week on an 0 program has not proven feasible. The the 79 High Street social enterprise.
ongoing basis Oatlands Key system has been

implemented as a baseline means of 7-day
public access.

b. Make available for community use The Oatlands Gaoler’s Residence and Continue to encourage community use as
as per the use policy. 0 Supreme Court House Use Policy has been © per the policy.

updated to guide and promote community
use.

C. Review and continue the A review of interpretation was undertaken Seek external funding to update and refresh
implementation of the Oatlands to ensure security of exhibits as part of the interpretation as opportunities arise.
Supreme Court House M Oatlands Key system.

Interpretation Project (subject to
further end-use/business planning

d. Continue to foster partnerships Partnerships have been promoted as per Continue to seek opportunities to staff and
with relevant stakeholders for the the use policy, generally limited to short- open the building — particularly aligned with
use of the building as a small O term events, exhibitions etc. the 79 High Street social enterprise and/or
museum and interpretation centre. other partnerships.

e, Seek funding (whether internal or The court house is included in the ambit of
external) for the development ofa = S the social enterprise at 79 High Street as a
business plan for the court house. ‘satellite’ site.
 f. Development of a business plan,
which will consider where the
Court House fits with other Vv
Oatlands and regional/thematic
heritage initiatives.

g. Subject to the findings of the
business plan, seek to operate the
Court House as a community 7
focused small museum and
heritage interpretation centre.
 Short/Medium

6 Roc h e H da | | eeern or Progress against the initiative during 2014-18 | Consequent broad strategy for 2018-23

ongoing

a. Undertake a landscape master plan No progress however a conservation A priority for the next strategy.
for the site which considers the management plan for the site has been
military parade ground, nominated as a priority initiative.
reinstatement of the State School S
iron gates, archaeological remains
and interpretation of the gaol arch.

b. Undertake essential maintenance Council has now taken ownership of the Continue the essential maintenance program
to the building and seek to site, and a budget for essential as informed by the forthcoming CMP.
undertake restoration work where maintenance has been obtained through
possible. O the sale of the Interlaken Stock Reserve.

This maintenance program has been
partially implemented.

C. Explore and promote the Archaeological test-trenching has been Include archaeological management of the
archaeological values of the site undertaken on the barracks site inthe rear site as a priority in the forthcoming CMP and
through the Southern Midlands M of Roche Hall and determined that archaeology strategy.

Historical Archaeology Strategy. significant archaeological potential exists.

d. Utilise the building for council The building is well-utilised by Rural Alive | Continue to maximise use of the building.
operations and other community and Well and Council’s Landcare unit.
based organisations (e.g. HESC, O
RAW).
 7 Oatlands Military = enmewm
; Progress against the initiative during 2014-18 | Consequent broad strategy for 2018-23
Precinct “=
a. Continue to encourage research Further research has been undertaken on Continue to undertake research on the site as
(historical and archaeological) into the site as needs-arise (e.g. archaeological | needs and opportunities arise.
the Oatlands Military Precinct to research designs, commissariat
gain a better understanding of O interpretation, public enquiries etc.).
layout, physical remains and
overall context.
b. Further develop interpretive media The Oatlands Military Precinct Seek external funding to update and refresh
for the Oatlands Military Precinct interpretation plinths have been refreshed interpretation as opportunities arise.
for incorporation into related 0 (due to vandalism and fading). The
interpretation projects. ‘Beacons’ project has included the
Gaoler’s Residence as a site to enhance
interpretation of the site.
 8 Southern Midlands jenMewn
; Progress against the initiative during 2014-18 | Consequent broad strategy for 2018-23
Convict Sites “=
a. Continue to investigate, document Interpretive installations have been Continue to work with UTas (and other
and promote the convict heritage installed at Tunbridge, Colebrook, Picton relevant partners) on pursuing research,
of the Southern Midlands where and Broadmarsh probation station sites archaeological and interpretation projects
opportunities arise. 0 (or nearby). This was further to the around the convict heritage of the Southern
Southern Midlands Convict Sites project Midlands.
which provides a substantial research base
for future initiatives.
b. Encourage and foster partnerships A major archaeological research project,
with other institutions for the potentially over serval years, has been
investigation and promotion of the developed in partnership with the
convict heritage of the Southern 0 University of Tasmaia. The Convict
Midlands. Archaeology of the Southern Midlands
(CASM) project will commence in January
2019.
C. Explore possibilities for multimedia
interpretation of convict sites, in
particular those that are difficult to 0
access or have little above-ground
remains.
 Short/Medium
9 Archaeology eerie OO
; Progress against the initiative during 2014-18 | Consequent broad strategy for 2018-23
Program “=

a. Formulate a Southern Midlands Not progressed, however the CASM To be undertaken as a priority in the next
Historical Archaeology Strategy project (as above) has taken part of this strategy, as well as furthering the CASM
which sets initiatives, priorities and S initiative. project and the Oatlands Gaol archaeological
a research/works agenda for the project (once the pool is removed).
next 5 years.

b. Complete all reporting and An archaeology project officer and the Continue as required.
curatorial responsibilities from S heritage project officer positions have
previous archaeolgocial works. addressed the outstanding reporting and

curatorial responsibilities as a priority.

C. Contiue to facilitate public Whilst the summer archaeology program Continue to work with UTas (and other
archaeology programs including an has been in abeyance whilst the above relevant partners) on pursuing archaeological
annual summer archaeology initiative has been ‘caught up’ on, the projects around the Southern Midlands
fieldschool in conjunction with the CASM project in collaboration with UTas pursuant to the archaeology strategy.
Centre for Heritage at Oatlands. O will pick this up from 2019.

Monir archaeological projects have been
undertaken on an as-needs basis (e.g.
works driven).

d. Populate the archaeology schedule Not progressed. Progress as part of a future planning scheme
of the draft Southern Midlands Vv amendment.
Planning Scheme (once adopted) in
order to offer adequate protection
 to important archaeological sites
(as informed by the Southern
Midlands Historical Archaeology
Strategy).
e, Encourage external researchers to Public enquiries are very frequent and Continue on an as-required basis.
utilise the archaeological resources continue to be a routine part of the
(e.g. research, sites and collections) heritage team’s activities.
of the Southern Midlands (as O
guided by the historical
archaeology strategy).
 10 Green Ponds ceectomon
; Progress against the initiative during 2014-18 Consequent broad strategy for 2018-23
Watch House _—
a. Develop a project plan and Some occasional community use has Continue to seek interest groups for use
undertake a feasibility study on occurred, and preliminary discussions with of the building.
the use of the watch house as a possible longer-term use by various groups,
heritage centre, which might S however the take-up has not occurred.
explore partnership
opportunities. An application for external funding for
further fitout was not successful.
b. Encourage community use of the
building for temporary
exhibitions, workshops, O
meetings etc.
 11. Maher’sPoint  ~mueum
ongoing Progress against the initiative during 2014-18 Consequent broad strategy for 2018-23
Cottage
a. Seek funding to undertake An application to an external funding body | Tobe removed from future strategies.
restoration of the building to a S for works to the cottage to facilitate arts
habitable state. residencies was unsuccessful.
b. Explore use options such as an
interpretation centre for the
natural heritage values of the Vv
lake, or for use as an artist-in-
residence facility.
C. Explore options for the In 2016 an expression of interest process
restoration of the cottage that resulted in the privatisation of the cottage
may include privatisation. L with a series of conservation conditions to
ensure suitable heritage outcomes.
 Short/Medium
1 2 Ch dun cy Va | e eeern or Progress against the initiative during 2014-18 Consequent broad strategy for 2018-23
ongoing
a. As required, review and No progress other than discussions that Review of the Joint Management Plan 2010
incorporate specific historic reviews are overdue on both the Joint is scheduled for implementation and
heritage management Management Plan 2010 and the Statutory completion in 2019.
strategies in any review of the Management Plan 1993
Chauncy Vale Management S
Plan in conjunction with the
committee and other
stakeholders.
b. Develop a conservation No progress on planning, however Highlight the requirement for the
management plan for Day upgrades have bene undertaken on the conservation management plan in the
Dawn Cottage, which visitor centre, and walking track revised Joint Management Plan, inclusive of
incorporates landscape and M interpretation has been upgraded. timeframes and resourcing requirements.
archaeological management
provisions.
 13. Horse Drawn ceectomon
; Progress against the initiative during 2014-18 Consequent broad strategy for 2018-23

Heritage “=

a. Continue to work with the The project was put on-hold and the shed Further progression of this initiative is
Green Ponds Progress sub-leased for a period, which has allowed dependent upon support from the Green
Association sub-committee to electrical connection and a budget for other Ponds Progress Association. Council to
support the development of O Upgrade works. provide assistance as necessary.
future plans for the facility and
collection.
 14 = Streetscapes and 7™ueum
; Progress against the initiative during 2014-18 Consequent broad strategy for 2018-23
Landscapes “=
a. Continue to foster partnerships In the absence of grant funding, Council has Continue to continue to monitor potential
with utility companies for been unable to progress further stages of grant funding sources to enable further
methods to minimise/undo undergrounding of power-lines in Oatlands. stages of undergrounding of power lines to
installations which have an 0 be undertaken.
unnecessary negative impact TasNetworks, being the Tasmanian
upon heritage streetscape/ Government State owned company
townscapes. responsible for electricity transmission (i.e.
poles and wires) no longer has a scheme to
b. Seek funding for the subsidise underground placements.
implementation of initiatives to
reduce/undo streetscape
elements which have
unnecessary impact upon °
heritage streetscape/
townscapes.
C. Review the 1997 Oatlands and In relation to the Kempton Streetscape Retain in future strategy as a broad
Kempton Streetscape plans. Plan, a working group consisting of Council initiative.
and community representatives has been
S established and it is continuing to
implement priority actions identified within
the Kempton Streetscape Plan.
 d. Review the implications of any New precinct provisions have been Continue to remain involved in the
new planning scheme implemented through the Southern consultation process for State Planning
provisions in terms of ¢ Midlands Interim Planning Scheme 2015 Provisions and any other relevant
approaches to heritage and further review is pending as part of the | consultation.
streetscape/landscape projects Tasmanian Planning Scheme.

e, Continue to foster streetscape
and landscape improvement 0
initiatives consistent with
planning scheme provisions.
 ° Short/Medium
15 _—— Heritage eerie Oe
; Progress against the initiative during 2014-18 Consequent broad strategy for 2018-23
Collections _—
a. Continue to refine and A heritage collections database framework |= Continue as opportunities arise.
implement heritage collection has been developed and refined for
procedures further to council's archaeological and heritage object
heritage collection policy. O collections. A key role of the heritage
officer position is cataloguing, audit and
continued improvement of collections
management.
b. Establish an industry standard The collections store has practically Pursue as a priority in the new strategy.
collection store to house S outgrown the gaoler’s residence and
council’s heritage collection. preliminary place are being developed for
relocation to another facility which will
C. Ensure that all heritage require further planning and funding.
collection display spaces are
adequate and appropriate for O
their purpose.
d. Continue to utilise council’s Interpretation projects have been Continue as opportunities arise.
heritage collection for research undertake at the Oatlands Gaoler’s
and display. Residence, temporary displays in the
0 Oatlands and Kempton Council Offices, a
permanent display in the Victoria Hall
Kempton as well as partnerships such as
Arts Tasmania initiatives.
 e, Continue partnerships with Continued collection exploration and Continue as opportunities arise.
relevant response to Heritage and Archeological
agencies/groups/individuals collection items from Oatlands Gaol AIR.
with an interest in heritage Continued collaboration with volunteers
collections. O working within SMC collection. Ongoing

visitation by historical research and
genealogy groups to view display of and
stored collection items.

f. Continue to pursue online Substantial gains have been made with the | Continue to pursue online availability of
availability of heritage eHive online collections database and to Heritage collection data as a priority.
collection data. through Trove as a means of increasing

access to and exposure of council’s
heritage collections.

O
Promotion of collection items and events
through social media including Facebook
and Instagram providing exposure to
heritage sites and activities.

g. Undertake a feasibility study This initiative was included in the MEDALS Pursue as a priority in the new strategy.
and seek to establish a project however has not been substantially
‘commercial’ pursued at this stage.
heritage/archaeological Vv
collections store to house
council's collection and to offer
collection management
services to others.
 ° Short/Medium/
16 Heritage Long-term or
Ed U catio N & Dp U b | IC ongoing Progress against the initiative during 2014-18 Consequent broad strategy for 2018-23
Engagement
a. Continue to develop and stage The Convict Archaeology in the Southern Refine the UTas collaboration for ongoing
education and public programs Midlands Project is a key education annual archaeology programs.
attached to heritage projects, in initiative in collaboration with the
particular the summer 0 University of Tasmania to be rolled out
archaeology program and from 2019 and take up where the earlier
associated public archaeology SMC archaeology programs left-off.
program/open days.
b. Work with the Heritage Education The Heritage Projects team works closely Continue to foster a close working
and Skills Centre to promote the with the Centre for Heritage on relationship with the Centre for Heritage
heritage of the Southern Midlands 0 collaborative projects — and in particular and where possible align and collaborate
in wider heritage education and with the 79 High Street ‘Heritage Hub’ on education projects in-common.
skills programs. project then this collaboration will
continue.
C. Where possible, assist students The heritage Projects team attend to Continue to attend to these enquiries.
and researchers investigate and regular public enquiries regarding research
promote the heritage of the O into Southern Midlands heritage and
Southern Midlands relevant themes.
d. When possible, include Southern SMC has staged an event in most years of Continue to promote SMC events/sites/
Midlands activities in wider Vv these events as well as events staged by collections
heritage ‘festival’ programs such other organisations such as U3A etc.
as the National Trust Heritage
 Festival, National Archaeoogy
Week etc.
e, Work with local schools to include Regular school group tours are operated on Continue to engage local schools in
Southern Midlands heritage an as-requested basis. heritage projects.
themes into curriculum.
O Work was done during 2015 in developing
curriculum for schools, however this has
not yet been taken-up.
f. Consider the development of a Whilst a ‘bursary scheme’ per-se has not Further consider such a bursary scheme.
research bursary scheme where yet been pursued, SMC’s support for the
value for money to council can be Convict Archaeology in the Southern
demonstrated in the support of S Midlands provides tertiary students with an
undergaduate and postgraduate opportunity for on-site learning etc.
students.
g. Engage the public wherever Public engagement initiatives are a part of ©§ Continue public engagement initiatives
possible in the planning and all heritage projects. wherever possible.
implementation of heritage O
projects.
 ° : Short/Medium

17 H e ritag e To UrISM errern or Progress against the initiative during 2014-18 Consequent broad strategy for 2018-23

ongoing

a. Better identify those places Through the Southern Midlands Convict Retain as an initiative in the future strategy.
within Southern Midlands which Sites project some opportunities for
have the potential for installations at selected convict sites were
integration into heritage tourism pursued.
initiatives — both geographically —§ §S
and thematically, with a This initiave was otherwise not
particular focus on publicly substantially pursued .
owned sites.

b. Continue to foster an alignment SMC participated in the consultation for Continue to align with wider initiatives.
to statewide heritage tourism the Statewide Heritage Tourism Strategy
strategies and principles. 0 and the subsequent review and has a

continued involvement with the Heritage
Highway Tourism Association.

C. Ensure that the interpretation of Interpretation initiatives are a key focus of | Continue to seek opportunities for new and
Southern Midlands heritage the new Heritage Officer position and upgraded interpretation alongside other
places is modern, dynamic, 0 progress has been made on the Oatlands heritage initiatives.
unique and memorable. Gaol, Commissariat, Convict Sites, Kempton

Hall (etc).

d. Seek linkages and cooperative Initiatives such as the Beacons Project Continue to seek and foster such sub-
heritage tourism projects with which has been staged in collaboration regional linkages and collaboration.
other Councils within the sub- O with Derwent Valley, Brighton and Clarence
region. City Council’s is an example of
 collaboration for tourism initiatives across a
wider geographic area.
Participation in initiatives in collaboration
with the Heritage Highway Tourism
Association.
e, Promote the use of council Sites such as Callington Mill, the Oatlands Continue to promote this usage in-line with
owned heritage sites in regional Gaoler’s Residence, Oatlands Court House user policies.
and statewide events/festivals 0 (etc.) are regularly used for events
(even if not heritage focussed). (whether heritage or not, but in-line with
the various use policies).
 ° Short/Medium
18 Pa rt Ners h | PS errern or Progress against the initiative during 2014-18 Consequent broad strategy for 2018-23
ongoing
a. Provide support wherever The soon to open ‘Heritage Hub’ at 79 High Continue to implement and review the
possible for groups and Street, further to the Oatlands Commissariat | various planning documents for 79 High
individuals with an interest and 79 High Street Use Policy has been Street and the heritage hub particularly in
in the heritage of the devised to accommodate local heritage collaboration with the Centre for Heritage at
Southern Midlands. interest groups and to promote the place as Oatlands.
a base for activities with the common theme | Continue to seek partnerships and
O of heritage and traditional skills. collaboration.
The Convict Archaeology in the Southern
Midlands collaboration with UTas is an
important partnership as too is collaboration
with the Heritage Highway Tourism
Association.
b. Work with agencies such as The Heritage Projects team has provided Continue to work with such agencies where
the Tasmanian Heritage support to agencies such as Heritage opportunities arise.
Council, National Trust, Tasmania in the review of the Tasmanian
Heritage Tasmania, Tourism Heritage Register, participated regularly in Continue regular participation in events such
Tasmana etc. on the the National Trust Heritage Festival as well as the National Trust Heritage Festival.
management of heritage O as participating in initiatives such as the
within the Southern Legislative Council Enquiry into Built
Midlands and/or related Heritage Tourism, the Tasmanian Building
themes. and Construction Industry Training Board
heritage skills survey etc.
