Oe —a
) : .
a (cio a — etme 4 ma US CO Cee
: at, x
- — =o -F 4 ha — te a
_—. — ee nate 4 \ 4 oO —- =
> ” om > —— of ° Se ’
es 7 — ay . bas -
eS a j eT : ‘ _ = — 2; =,
Oa re , Se, =
pig eS SM SP ae - 1] : ee eS
EE SC | <egy 4 | ‘ESSE «et
8 ok a Ji ok ae 3 )
Se I oN Ng eed , “ 72" —
2 sid a7: go” ’ sitet 3 Ce 4 wa ‘ sg ‘og =
ee -_ Se
: SS ees Aa Pe ; Gees os Cae Jamis
SS ee — ae ae ey “a ¥ ca
% s ———s — eo. 7 e afm : 74 ch a. Ss. Di - e
> a > ‘ ;
——- Ss —, ye ie
—. ae | = : oie re ~*
ee ie arian
NTolLU aT da milo lfe late km Oxel sled)
miki ce) i com al=\sirelel-myiceli-xe hg
2019-2023
= —
——S=S=
—
SS
, —S_
~A
 NYoLU iat eamiulcolrolarekmOcolelaled| Malt ice) irom al-iirelel- my iceli-\e hay 40d bey AU yc)

et ee Ste a Re

Ti a ee <<a
rags a ' ws a "a a 4 =

32. se eS 2 ae

29 bi —.? —— =
| Fz : ee $ 4 : rv. te

Z a Se:
Southern Midlands Council is established as (LUPAA), to the management of one-off and
one of 29 Tasmanian municipal councils ongoing heritage projects as a means of
under the Local Government Act 1993. value-adding to the heritage assets of the
Comprising of 2611 square kilometres It is one municipal region.
of the larger municipal regions In Tasmania, This document is guided by SMC's Strategic
however with a population of just over 6000 Plan 2014-2023, as well as other relevant
people, has one of the smallest populations. strategic planning initiatives, such as the
Nonetheless, the Southern Midlands has a Oatlands Integrated Development Strategy
wealth of historic heritage which enriches the and the Midlands Economic Development
community, with 220 places on the and Land Use Strategy as well as ad number
Tasmanian Heritage Register, over 300 places of tourism plans and strategies towards which
on the local heritage schedule, and four Council has an interest. This plan also
heritage precincts. considers the interests of various external
This document has been developed to guide ei cleat having Interest in the heritage of
Southern Midlands Council (SMC) towards a ine region (Ie. The Tasmanian Heritage
more strategic and integrated approach to Councll Tourism Tasmania, the Heritage
heritage management. For at least 20 years, Highway Tourism Region Association) and
SMC has undertaken various roles as a various heritage interest groups as we as
heritage manager — from development Integrating, where appropriate, state plans,
appraisal pursuant to the objectives of the objectives and benchmarks.
Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
2
 a iy, a SMC’'s involvement in heritage takes three broad streams:
OW, qe Ll oY 'f e Asa Planning Authority under the Local Government
wa, : i] — Act 1993, SMC is to administer the statutory
~ a f ¥ - — requirements of heritage places in the municipal area
A La ew Ss : = under the Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
: a, 3S (LUPAA — Part 2, Objective 2g), and as a referral body

os 3 y < under the Historic Cultural Heritage Act 1995 (HCHA).
- Be | e As the owner and manager of a number of significant
: , an heritage sites and public soaces, SMC voluntarily acts
U | to preserve, utilise and promote the heritage values of
bs these places through various heritage projects.

e As an advocate within the community — promoting
best practice standards and encouraging the
community to participate in the management of their
own heritage.

e As the owner of the Centre for Heritage at Oatlands
(CFH), which incorporates Heritage Building Solutions
(HBS - a commercial heritage building, restoration and
consultancy enterprise) and the Heritage Education
and Shills Centre (HESC — a not-for-profit heritage skills
training organisation). Note that CFH operates under
its own business plan and board, however crossover
initiatives will be included in this plan as appropriate.

The primary document which governs Southern Midlands
Council's heritage (and other) initiatives is the Strategic Plan
2014 to 2023, which is updated every ten years (with four-
yearly review). From this, the Annual Plan sets shorter-term
targets, and the Annual Report reports on the outcomes and
progress of such. Alongside these documents, the
Community Plan (updated every 5-10 years) assists in the
governance and delivery of these initiatives. This document
has been formulated in accordance with those various plans
and strategies.
3
 NYoLU iat eamiulcolrolarekmOcolelaled| Malt ice) irom al-iirelel- my iceli-\e hay 40d bey AU yc)
In relation to heritage, the following sections of the Strategic Plan are directly relevant:
| theme | ret Key strategy/action
2.2.1.1. Seek opportunities to support the development and growth of a wide range of tourism in the Southern Midlands
5912 Seek opportunities to further develop and link heritage tourism opportunities both within and outside the region,
2.2.1. Increase the number of — including convict sites, the Oatlands Military Precinct and Callington Mill Precinct
tourists visiting and soending money
In the municipality. 2017 Work with Heritage Tasmania and Tourism Tasmania to progress the recommendations of the Tasmanian Historic
~~ Heritage Tourism Strategy at the local level
2.2.1.6 Support and maintain the relationship with the Heritage Highway Touring Region
. Maintain support for viable Council business operations such as Callington Mill Business Precinct, Heritage Building
2.3. Business 2.3.1.9. . . . .
Solutions and Heritage Education & Skills Centre
3.1.1.1 Manage the heritage values of Council owned heritage buildings according to affordable best practice.
31.12 Work in Partnership with the State Government to ensure the strategic long-term management of publicly owned
a heritage sites.
3.1.1.3 Implement the Oatlands Commissariat Master Plan
3.1.1.4 Seek to establish the Oatlands gaol site as an historic/archaeological education centre
3.1.1. Maintenance and restoration
of significant public heritage assets. 3.1.2.1 Support and monitor ongoing development of the Heritage Skills Centre in Oatlands.
31.22 Facilitate and investigate opportunities for assisting heritage property owners in conserving heritage places
3.1.2. Act as an advocate for ao alongside sustainable ongoing usage.
heritage and provide support to
heritage property owners.
3.1.3.1 Undertake and encourage research and publications on the heritage values of the Southern Midlands.
3.1.3. Investigate, document,
understand and promote the 3.1.3.2 Undertake the effective heritage interpretation, education & Communication programs.
heritage values of the Southern
Midlands.
3.1.3.3 Continue to manage and utilise Councils heritage resources and collections.
3134 Support the occupancy / use of Council owned heritage buildings and spaces by arts & crafts groups who
—— specialise in heritage crafts.
3.1.3.5 Support the creation of a state authority to develop a strategy and various resource on heritage sites/buildings
3.13.6 Recognition and ensuring the maintenance of the significance of trees in the landscape especially along the
a Heritage Highway (Midland Highway) and the revegetation where trees have been removed
3.3.1. Ensure that the cultural
diversity of the Southern Midlands is 3.3.1.1 Identify, and promote the Cultural heritage of the Southern Midlands through festivals and events.
maximised.
3.4.1.) Continue to support the State Government's Regional Planning Initiative and to work in co-operation within the
a Southern Tasmanian region to finalise a new planning scheme.
3.4.1. Aregulatory environment that ; ; ; ; ; ;
is supportive of and enables 3.4.1.2 Encourage the State Government to provide more direction to the planning system through the introduction of
appropriate development a more State Planning Policies, State Planning Directives and common statewide planning scheme provisions.
34123 Make use of the Joint Land Use Planning Initiative (JLUPI) outcomes to develop the local content for the new
ov planning scheme.
4.10.1. Increase the educational
and employment opportunities . . . . wy: .
available within the Southern 4.10.1.2. Provide heritage skills learning opportunities through the centre for heritage.
Midlands.
 \
LO , | oN
Pursuant to the objectives (Schedule 1, Table E.13.1 of the Southern Midlands Interim
objective 2g) of the planning process Planning Scheme 2015 (the scheme) lists
established by LUPAA, Planning Authorities individual places considered to have local or
are required to conserve those buildings, state heritage value — being the local heritage
areas or other places which are of scientific, schedule — this contains over 300 places. Table
aesthetic, architectural or historical interest, E.13.2 lists four heritage precincts (Oatlands
or otherwise special cultural value. From this Township, Callington Mill precinct, Kempton
requirement, local planning schemes in township precinct and the Heritage Mile
Tasmania have evolved (to varying content (Mangalore). Tables E.13.3 and E.13.4 intend to
and degrees) heritage provisions and list Cultural landscape precincts and places of
schedules of heritage places through which archaeological potential but have not yet
this objective is given currency. Traditionally been populated. The original heritage
there has been little consistency in how the schedule was initially complied from a variety
intent of the Act translates into planning of sources (largely National Trust lists) as part of
scheme provisions, however the raft of the former planning scheme (1998) was
interim planning schemes currently in place updated via a more rigorous process as part of
across Tasmania has sought greater the 2007 GHD Southern Midlands Heritage
consistence and the forthcoming Tasmanian project. The interim scheme included most of
Planning Scheme will provide — further the recommendations from that project in
consistence.
.
 a > poe A a terms of new listings, revised listings and heritage areas and it
Oe 4, - ce e | : a Is considered that these listings are generally sound and up-to-
A Se date.

if Be ee ae Council manages the heritage values of places listed solely on

Bx ne {= ~—siTables £.13.1 and E.13.2 of the scheme and the THC

, ee “a i a8 ert Mm ieee undertakes a dual assessment of those places on the THR — alll

a eo ¥ se Brod through a discretionary development application for those

A... lO Ws See proposals which do not meet the criteria for exempt works

an ¢ oS ee GaN rs sit under Clause E.13.4 of the scheme.

| Bre

p= ale rds PN SS Under the Historic Cultural Heritage Act 1995, The Tasmanian

ae al. an. hina Heritage Council (THC) are the authority for applications for

a 5 kook <P works on places listed on the Tasmanian Heritage Register

He: Shee ee FS (THR). Planning Authorities manage the application process

q EN ee ee and must forward any application for works to a place on the
THR for the THC to firstly Undertake a preliminary assessment
and Issue a notice of interest/no interest and if the THC wish to
determine an application then a statutory timeframe aligned
with the Planning Authority's timeframe under LUPAA runs
(along with public notification and internal/external referral
processes). Once determined, the Planning Authority must
include THC conditions and advice on a planning permit for
works fo listed places and must refuse any permit which the
THC refuses.
Council’s Planning Officer and Planning Administration statt
manage the referrals process and statutory timeframes and all
applications (including pre-application enquines which may
result in either an exemption or a need for application) are
referred to the Manager Heritage Projects for assessment
against the relevant provisions. The overall synchronization of
each application is undertaken by the Planning Officer, offen
determined under delegation as part of the Development
Assessment Committee (DAC) process. Any contentious
applications, such as those which attract representations or
are recommended for refusal, are determined by full Council
(as a Planning Authority) with consideration of the
recommendations of the Planning Officer and any other
expert opinion.
6
 ns oe !
Aboriginal Heritage ae (Se aa
Whilst as a Planning Authority Council does not have a = pad a | a aise af
direct role in Aboriginal heritage management under the Saeed ee ay
scheme, as a property owner and community/heritage by Se
advocate Council has a role to acknowledge and
protect Aboriginal heritage. The Aboriginal heritage of
the midlands richly demonstrates millennia of past icc ‘ )
occupation and land use and remnants of the ancient Ni ‘ :
landscape are common. Although Aboriginal heritage is uve © E C LoaeSN
beyond the scope of this strategy, it is recommended that "a Fe ,
SMC give greater consideration to its responsibility as both EE eee OES
an advocate and landowner towards the protection of itl lilt HAMMAN TT
Aboriginal cultural heritage through recognition, pS af ‘
outreach projects and compliance with the Aboriginal tie 2a
Heritage Act 1975. want:
Moe ie
Halfway House, Antill Ponds
Rockwood Antill Ponds
Grainleigh, Constitution Hill
Swanston Hotel.
/
 NYoLU iat eamiulcolrolarekmOcolelaled| Malt ice) irom al-iirelel- my iceli-\e hay 40d bey AU yc)
ore ° Short/Medium/
| INITlaTIVes Long-term or
ongoing

Q. Ensure that heritage strategic planning documents reflect the
provisions of the Southern Midlands Interim Planning Scheme 2015 (or O
successor]

b. Continue to participate in relevant legislative review processes or
relevance fo historic and aboriginal heritage management. O

C. Ensure that rigorous heritage assessments are undertaken in the
statutory planning process. O

d. Explore resource sharing with other councils for effective and
consistent statutory heritage management. O

e, Develop ‘practice notes’ and other advice for heritage property
owners To assist in managing the values of their properties (preferably 0
in collaboration with the Heritage Education and Skills Centre.

f. Liaise with Aboriginal Heritage Tasmania tor more effective and
comprehensive systems for managing Aboriginal heritage values in 0
the Southern Midlands.

g Ensure that heritage best-practice is included in the Oatlands
Structure Plan. M

Short term (S) — Expected to be completed during the life of the strategy.
Medium term (M) - Expected to be commenced (and possibly completed)
during the life of the strategy.
Long term (L) — The eventual goal, which may be completed during the life of
the strategy, however is more likely to occur after 2018 (with short and medium
term initiatives working towards that).
Ongoing (O) - Undertaken throughout the life of the strategy and expected to
continue beyond 2018.

8
 = oF vas
! ee
6 eS
3 ee | ae
eS  — le
| lia 2 \ee
mam A |
Cann ee ee a
P
Besides council's responsibility to manage conservation management plans, business
historic heritage as per the previous section, plans and interoretation plans, which are
the strategic plan includes a number of non- listed here as relevant to each project. The
statutory heritage projects. following figure demonstrates that heritage
projects are driven by Council's recognition
The support or heritage projects Is outside of the benefits fo the Community’s sense of
Council's core mandate a planning authority place, education and tourism opportunities,
yet is recognised by Council as one of the and how collaboration and crossover with
key strategies in developing and promoting Initiatives in these other streams are essential
the cultural heritage of the region in order to for the success of heritage projects:
reap the flow on benefits in terms of
community sense of place, education and
tourism opportunities. Whilst striving to
demonstrate best-practice heritage
management, Council acknowledges the
flow on benefits as an essential part of the |
rationale for heritage projects, and the Community
immeasurable benefits that arise from such. i,
X Heritage
The heritage projects initiated and managed >» projects
by Council are many and varied - a brief apie i haere
description of the background, current state, ceo ey ai
and future directions of these projects will be
provided here. These initiatives are driven by
Qa number of individual plans, such as
9
 NYoLU iat eamiulcolrolarekmOcolelaled| Malt ice) irom al-iirelel- my iceli-\e hay 40d bey AU yc)
a aa | lel es} ta HY) allel alc as aS _ oe
ae iis Ga LYS
‘ et, : i I a .\ Dy». S74 5
oe ae no ne = | ye A ww ine > WY y
ee oe
o> a 6
2, Se?
E =f
Note that it is likely that during the early implementation of this
WS oe “ strategy that Callington Mill will be leased to private enterprise
- with the permitted use being defined as the operation and
maintenance of a historic site and tourist operations reasonably
associated therewith (including retain and _ interpretation
operations) and reasonably necessary ancillary purposes.
The Callington Mill complex is a substantially intact wind and
steam mill complex, established in 1837. The mill tower is the
icon of Oatlands, and the array of extant associated buildings
makes this a unique industrial heritage complex. Since being
ourchased by the State Government in 1964, the last forty or so
years have seen various phases of restoration at the Callington
Mill Site. Periodic small-scale restoration and investigation of re-
establishment of the mill was undertaken during the 1970s and
1980s. The first major restoration phase was in 1988, when a
Bicentennial Grant (also supported by Coca Cola Amatil)
allowed stabilisation and access fitout of the windmill tower.
Throughout the 1990s, opportunistic small-scale restoration
continued, with a conservation management plan being
developed in 1994, and in 1999 the tower cap and fan wheel
were added.
In 2010 a $2.4m reconstruction and precinct develooment
project was implemented, which refitted the mill tower as the
only working Lincolnshire-style windmill in the Southern
Hemisphere producing quality flour and associated products.
10
 In 2017, the visitor centre was closed and regular tours of the mill tower ceased — with the intention
of seeking a private operator for the site. As at late 2018, the mill is producing flour in a ‘business
as usual’ capacity however there are no visitor services aft the site.
The site retains community uses such as the community garden and the blacksmith’s initiative
which are to be retained for public use and visitation as conditions of any sub-lease.
Wi. ~ aay IRS ,izee* |
| 4 —_ = = . ie bis inp “4 x Cs “sh
: | jet at
: + a ry &
— AN .
. ~ | 3 \ sn =
ft a —> 47. : at . :
“if oh —
st ; 2 se
eye : Short/Medium/
2 INITIATIVES Long-term or
ongoing
Q. Unsure that Council's resoonbibilities in upholding the sub-lease
and maintenance requirements of Callington Mill are met. 0
b. Where possible, explore partnerships projects with the lessee of
Callington Mill. O
C, Porovide support where possible to the existing Community uses
of the site, namely the blacksmith’s initiatve and community 0
garden.
1]
 i Deed SONI LS RE OE Se aa se
ee
TWO EXHIBITIONS MAY 2 (RAI tee. Osc c( Meg ecnceer = tern OT sr eg @erde fet O.0. Vn 3
DOING TIME, OA SE ! SES ee Ve ee AS
OATLANDS GAOL RESIDEN( —_—_—_—_——— Seer pas Sig. . fs Ne
FED sac tuawca pert cerns
= ESSENCE 5-24Ma )
: ——— Owned by Southern Midlands Council, and the largest building
eer oe am “(kel UB remaining of the Oatlands Military Precinct, is the 1837
ao ¥ —_— wares eS Bit Qatiands Gaol complex. Comprising of the two-storey
ee ee = SC Georgian Gaoler’s Residence, as well as a c2000m? former
; ‘ il 3S | 7 j han: Eek. gaol yard and the lower portion of the formerly 6-metre high
i Lt sandstone perimeter wall, these are the remains of the largest
regional colonial gaol in Tasmania. Most of the gaol buildings
were demolished in 1937, and in 1954 the yard was filled to
accommodate the municipal in-ground swimming pool.
The Gaoler’'s Residence has been restored as part of a
$750,000 project and now houses the SMC Heritage Projects
Office, exhibition and museum space as well as an
archaeological artifact laboratory and store. The building Its
publicly accessible 7-days a week via the ‘Oatlands Key’
system and has an active Artist in Residence program. Work
has been done to stabilize the gaol walls and the original
arched gateway has been moved back to Its original location
beside the Gaoler’s residence after having been moved to
High Street in 1939.
Once the pool is removed, the entire gaol yard will be
available for the implementation of the Oatlands Gaol Master
Plan, which envisages meaningfully interored public open
space with a focus on the archaeology of the site. Substantial
planning Is still required to meet the master plan objectives.
A broad concept document has been developed (but not yet
endorsed) which seeks to utilise the gaol as a centre for
learning relating to heritage, trade skills, archaeology and
museum related fields — exploration of partnerships with the
Centre tor Heritage may act to progress that concept.
12
 eye : Short/Medium/
3 INITIATIVES Long-term or
ongoing
Q. Prepare documentation and a detailed project plan for the
demolition of the pool. S
b. Revisit the 2003 Archaeological Management Plan in-light of
pool removal and formulate a detailed and revised plan as
part of the pool removal, site rehabilitation and interoretaiton S
Orocess.
C, Formulate a landscape plan for the site for post-pool removal. .
d. Revise the interpretation plan to include the gaol yard in-light
of pool removal. S
e, Continue to make the building available for Artist in Residence
and other community based events/uses (as per gaol use and 0
artist in residence policies).
f. Continue to undertake historical and archaeolgoical research
on the site and related themes. O
g. Continue to seek funding for the overall Oatlands Gaol Master
Plan through internal and external sources — particularly for the
archaeological research and interpretation programs and O
landscaping.
h. Promote use of and access to the Gaoler’s Residence as per
the use policy, and potentially as an adjunct of the Heritage 0
Hub project.
I. Review the Oatlands Gaol Master Plan in-light of the new pool
project and imminent demolition of the current pool. M
j. Prepare documentation and a detailed project plan for the
demolition of the pool. S
13
 NYoLU iat eamiulcolrolarekmOcolelaled| Malt ice) irom al-iirelel- my iceli-\e hay 40d bey AU yc)
a Re. Patt <= grr | a ee

em,” 2 a 4" Les re y ZS 4 } ak ‘a 7 i ens & %»

1 Ree ‘ a ee ye ee a) YS" ebraRierate ter ee Oe uN’

MO) er ey

Lj. _ es BN 14 eee so cee ae ON

== S| \ yt 6a i) vA Sg he : , Se . 7

so eam oes Se WAIN OD T/ —_ > ~ or ez , "es ; Lae Pe eal * :

> IIR vstaeto’/ ik eamammian denied Rey VP ee ee ee OS Sie eS ee

SCOR Vee Ss NG | ZA es = ORE ret ee ee ae ee ; ,

: Race wy \ oo ae.

ors Se 9 Ms x Wi io

By eee: O: di Bap aay 4 a ‘

Ser ey Ro eee

ae ae ae, i) a Re ea

gat eG Rey Ihe

WV, ve SEEN |S d i :

pt ee | SS ae ‘

iit 2
In 2012, Southern Midlands Council purchased 79 High Street,
Oatlands — an 1108 square metre parcel of land, containing the
former Oatlands Commissariat Store, the Oatlands Guard
House archaeological site, and a cl18/0-1880s shop and
cottage fronting High Street (see initiative 5).
The commissariat is a large space in a very prominent position
relating to High Street and has the remains of a massive baker's
oven (c1880s) attached. The building offers significant
potential to create meaningful public space with
supplementary interpretation and possible reinvigoration of the
baker's oven. Such a use would link with the original use of the
building — 1.e. provisioning the town.
The site also has a high level of archaeological potential, being
the site of the guard house (demolished c1975) of which
substantial remains were found during an archaeological test-
trenching program in 2013, also the military sundial, sentry box
and the convict stocks

14
 *1e ° Short/Medium/
4 INITlaTIVeS Long-term or
ongoing
Q. Implement, operate and review as required the Heritage Hub
project plan(s) with view of maximising Community use of and
access fo the site (further to the use policy) and the promotion S
of partnerships.
b. Collaborate where possible with the Centre for Heritage at
Oatlands as the key tenant for the site (further to the SMC-CTfH 0
MOU) and the CfH business plan.
Cc, Continue to seek to value-add to the interpretation of and
research into the site. M
d. Seek a partnership for ongoing use of the bakers oven in
consultation with other site users. S
|
| ee
aT es
" 4 (\
i «*
TS | ad 9 | a
pe an os Sm ; |e — |
apie Le er Pp SH
Reet OS a fe
De eee 1 ee reas ents <o-7, .
3 a ee ay FT
er: % : ae Ge é Bee ie a oo Wee y
a yi wa * e ’ - ~ é ge? | = fe - 5 , "
15
 NYoLU iat eamiulcolrolarekmOcolelaled| Malt ice) irom al-iirelel- my iceli-\e hay 40d bey AU yc)
; iy o? > ~~ >

€@-H7 > ~~ A he RE OT Ns yl HAYA AGENTS
os a SS; - “a aa tT - ,

o* Ee TT a a : , at aed eA
ah SS | ee = | | . Bs ok:
aR > a destin a

= > bm ae Core) ce at b eilensiiiiniasindinneatncnttenies
4FZo INN Nie !
. Vp | > : ws
eg tee, F ints aN ~
4 ; / ¢

The Oatlands Supreme Court House (1829) is owned by SMC
and Is one of the oldest Supreme Court Houses In Australia. It
is In remarkably original condition and offers significant
potential for use as a facility to interpret the historic themes
relevant to the Oatlands Military Precinct and associated
buildings. The building was acquired from the National Trust in
2007, although Council had tenure of the building since 2002.
With the building comes a collection of chattels (on loan from
the National Trust), which derive from the 1910-1977 phase of
the building.

Due to the intact nature of the building, an analysis of
building fabric was undertaken in 2003 in a bid to better
Understand the building, and to plan future works. A
structural assessment was also undertaken in that year, which
lead to a structural stabilisation and essential works program.
Further non-essential works were undertaken in late 2008. In
2006 an _ interpretation and public access plan was
developed with the aim of determining public perceptions of
what best the building could be used for, and to suggest
interpretive themes and media which could effectively
deliver the heritage significance.

With a collection of objects associated with the Oatlands
Court House (contents as well as archaeological artifacts), in
2007 Council commissioned a preservation survey of the

16
 collection and the locations proposed to store and display that collection.
With the develooment of the interpretation plan and the preservation survey, an
implementation strategy was developed to clarify minor conflict between those reports and
to guide the implementation of the first stages of interpretation. The first stages of the
interoretation plan have been implemented and the building is publicly accessible 7-days
per week as an ‘Oatlands Key’ venue. The building is also open for pre-booked tours and
soecial community events, as per the Oatlands Gaol and Supreme Court House Use Policy.
A small kitchen, equal-access toilet and storeroom have been constructed as a standalone
building to support volunteer and community use.
eye : Short/Medium/
5 INITIATIVES Long-term or
ongoing
Q. Promote use of and access fo the court house as per the use
policy, and potentially as an adjunct of the Heritage Hub 0
project.
b. Make available for community use as per the use policy. 0
C. Seek external funding to update and refresh interpretation as
opportunities arise. M
d. Continue to foster partnerships with relevant stakeholders for
the use of the building as a small museum and interpretation 0
centre.
17
 NYoLU iat eamiulcolrolarekmOcolelaled| Malt ice) irom al-iirelel- my iceli-\e hay 40d bey AU yc)
ae: a BA ‘
a “2 = i '
FS. Z vot
. * 4 aul oJ = = ee i s :
(fs ; | ; 1
iT oe Nee a x Be
J WOES . se Se NE cite 4
— oo a*
. —4 ~ 6
1% 7 — a oe
eRe Ao ts
ba eo scare
Ae % o, B.S o. a as
vd Tera oS pes ae aa
, vk e % m
‘ 4b 7, Bes
|-—~ AAG . - ‘4 £
Roche Hall, 73 High Street, Oatlands is the former Oatlands
State School property, comprising the 1885 Victorian-Gothic
sandstone school building in the centre of Oatlands. In 2014,
the Tasmanian Government divested ownership of the
building to council and with recognition that the site has a
high level of community and social significance if Is intended
that the building be used for public purposes.
Aside from the impressive building, the site itself is very
significant as an historic and archaeological site, having
been the site of:
- Oatlands first settlement (1825)
- The first Oatlands Barracks and military parade ground
(1827)
- The convict barracks from the construction of the gaol
(1835)
- The Oatlands Probation Station (1839)
- The Oatlands Mechanic's Institute (1850s)
- The first Oatlands public school (1850s)
- The Oatlands Area School (1885-c2000’s)
18
 This archaeological significance was demonstrated by the 2012 summer archaeology program which
located substantial (shallow and largely intact) remains of the 1827 barracks. The building has a very
high level of community significance, having been the Oatlands State School within the living memory
of many locals.
The building comprises of four very large rooms, as well as foyers, large hallway, kitchenette and M&F
toilets. There are also large upstairs soaces which have been blocked off in the 1930s. The building ts
currently used as council offices, the headquarters for Rural Alive and Well as well as housing Council's
Landcare unit.
The front yard is used as landscaped public open space and the rear yard is parking. The Oatlands
Military Precinct interpretation trail begins in front of the building and three interpretive platforms are
installed on the site. Interpretation of the Oatlands Arch ts to be installed as a condition of approval of
the recent arch relocation. The site is in a very strategic location for Council/public purposes, being in
the centre of the town, a large soace with good access. This was recognised in the Oatlands
Integrated Development Strategy, which proposed the ‘Town Square’ principle, and a master
planning process for the site as part of a forthcoming Oatlands Structure Plan \s a priority.
eye : Short/Medium/
6 INITIATIVES Long-term or
ongoing
Q. Formulate a conservation management plan for the
building and site. S
b. Undertake a landscape master plan for the site which
considers the military parade ground, reinstatement of the
State School iron gates, archaeological remains and S
interoretation of the gaol arch.
c. | Undertake essential maintenance to the building and seek
to undertake restoration work where possible (as guided by 0
the CMP).
d. Explore and promote the archaeological values of the site
through the Southern Midlands Historical Archaeology M
Strategy.
e Utilise the building for council operations and other
community based organisations (e.g. RAW). O
19
 oe Rea aeag | rai

The area known as the Oatlands Military Precinct is the area
bounded by High, Barrack, Church Streets and the
Esplanade, Oatlands — which is the centre of the town and Is
still The administrative centre of the Southern Midlands. It Is in
this area where the township was established in the early
1820s, and by the 1840s if was the centre for what was to
intended to become the interior capital of Van Diemens
Land. The precinct comprised of at least 30 buildings
associated with the civil, government and convict
establishments, and was the longest operating military-lead
administrative precinct outside the major cities and
secondary punishment stations in Van Diemens Land - being
disbanded In the late 1850s.

The Oatlands Military Precinct is unique, as It was established
as the centre of what was to become a large city — which
didn't eventuate. The remnants of the precinct therefore
have not been subject to as thorough destruction as the early
remnants of those places which were to become cities.
Seven buildings remain of this precinct, and the entire area
has been demonstrated to be an area of extremely high
archaeological potential which may offer vast knowledge
about the formative processes of colonial military and civil
establishments. The Oatlands Gaol and Court House are
included within this precinct, and will be further detailed
below.

20
 Whilst SMC’s key focus Is the restoration and management of the Council owned buildings
within the military precinct (as outlined above), some work on further Understanding and
interpreting the precinct will be undertaken as a means of contextualising the buildings within
that precinct, and the precinct within the wider colonial administration.
Mechanisms for the protection of the archaeological resources of the precinct are also a key
consideration in the management of heritage values and work on understanding these
values has been undertaken both by council and the Tasmanian Heritage Council. Much of
the original precinct Is still in government ownership.
ere ° Short/Medium/
/ INITIATIVES Long-term or
ongoing
Q. Continue to encourage research (historical and archaeo-
logical) into the Oatlands Military Precinct to gain a better O
understanding of layout, physical remains and overall context.
b. Further develop interpretive media for the Oatlands Military
Precinct for incorporation into related interpretation projects. O
2 |
 NYoLU iat eamiulcolrolarekmOcolelaled| Malt ice) irom al-iirelel- my iceli-\e hay 40d bey AU yc)
ae e . i Ly
ia 4 AN SY Sf i es A Ae pL. Hs f oe 5 | t igy
<# =a | han Y/ 7g Kp yon pea Sy _ Sy 4 ee LUE actos § a
se si a el 2 A Nt Say
il » \ ay | A ~ Alea Ar ae 4 inn i
a NSA Cr che ee Ce mee! Mies em , ALY @ AS nh
4HHHE ee eh ne
HHA
s : J 1 » &
Beee
)
(UCN
|
It has long been recognised that the Southern Midlands has
a wealth of convict heritage, spread throughout the
municipal area. No less than 12 of the 80 known convict
Probation Station are located in the municipal area as well as
at least 10 other road, timber and bridge party stations etc. In
addition, there are a number of other convict sites, ranging
from watch-houses, police infrastructure, work sites etc. The
convict probation system is unique to Tasmania and is a key
part of the state’s contribution to the world heritage listing of
Australian convict sites.
During 2013-14 a major research project was undertaken to
identify, locate, research and document Southern Midlands
Convict sites. This culminated in a 20-page booklet and a
substantial collection of data on these important sites. An
exhibition was curated and interpretive installations were
erected on several sites.
This research has endless possibilities for further analysis and
potential for developing media and experiences reaching
throughout the region (and indeed inter-regional linkages, I.e.
the Convict Trail) as well as supporting the management and
protection of these sites into the future.
With the world heritage listing of Australian convict sites,
Southern Midlands sites have the potential to reap benefit
22
 from an increased interest and knowledge of these sites, and being positioned in central Tasmania
On a route used fo traverse between these sites, is seen as a substantial opportunity.
The Convict Archaeology of the Southern Midlands project - a collaborative archaeological and
research project (with an education component) with the University of Tasmania Is to be piloted in
2019 with the view of an annual project (see also Initiative 9).
4
ee am Tr - —T
a \ . “ns = was ne
We WE ives vs son
ae SS A
Om YS SWB } -. rg x
‘ | fe yf: he Sa
ere : Short/Medium/
8 INITlaTIVes Long-term or
ongoing
Q. Continue to investigate, document and promote the convict
heritage of the Southern Midlands where opportunities arise. O
b. Encourage and foster partnerships with other institutions for the
investigation and promotion of the convict heritage of the 0
Southern Midlands.
C. Explore possibilities for multimedia interpretation of convict
sites, in particular those that are difficult to access or have little 0
above-ground remains.
23
 NYoLU iat eamiulcolrolarekmOcolelaled| Malt ice) irom al-iirelel- my iceli-\e hay 40d bey AU yc)
eae es Ge, ae ee an @ | Leal alt Ra esa" SEE: en Oa
vue re, May 2 a exe’ gS \ a = Shel sa PRL ae
a eee a @ 4. ate : <3 4 aa Di ee Be Ey - -
a ——- Se SS ere ae , y ry 4 2 ‘ a eae Sa trey ai :
= a ty ofa we x 2. | fe : er ys JOEr”*e eos SS ee
: : ee aT Ea ig ses oe
ie = Sa we. — 1 ae Pew Re
Se Se EO EE A Oe "Ae ie
Penge , Te, Vigo a ae th ay See x sist ae a - a a: es oe ae
~ et
Between 2011 and 2013 Council ran a 2-3-week summer
archaeology program based at Oatlands which, in
conjunction with the Heritage Education and Skills Centre,
aimed to partner with various universities to offer a range of
archaeological management experience to graduate and
undergraduate students.
The model of each season Is to train 12-15 volunteer students,
Utilising Council heritage staff and 2-3 volunteer professional
archaeologists and undertake excavations on at least three
sites and survey on several sites during the three-week
program. Permits are gained, and research design and
planning are undertaken ahead of each program and
students gain experience in planning, excavation, survey,
reporting and artifact management.
A public archaeology program Is run alongside each season,
culminating in an open day which attracts 500 people.
Students are invited to submit proposals for follow-up projects
and publications and several postgraduate theses have
been done on Southern Midlands subjects.
In addition (in collaboration with Arts Tasmania) a model has
been formulated for student work-experience in collection
management and curatorship.
24
 The program has been on-hold since 2013 in order to deal with a backlog of reporting and curatorial
requirements, which as of 2018 is largely up-to-date and the program will recommence as part of the
Convict Archaeology of the Southern Midlands (see Initiative 8).
Whilst The excavation and research program has been somewhat ad-hoc to date, largely responding
to works-driven archaeological needs, if is recognised that a comprehensive Southern Midlands
Historical Archaeology Strategy is required in order to guide the future of the program through detailed
research agendas, better understanding of resources and site significance and to set a more strategic
direction for the program.
eye : Short/Medium/
9 INITIATIVES Long-term or
ongoing
Q. Formulate a Southern Midlands Historical Archaeology Strategy
which sets initiatives, priorities and a research/works agenda
for the next 5 years. S
b. Review and implement the Oatlands Gaol Archaeological
Management Plan as a priority in the redevelopment of that 6
site post-pool removal.
Cc. Contive to facilitate public archaeology programs including
an annual summer archaeology fieldschool in conjunction 0
relevant education partners.
d. Populate the archaeology schedule of the Southern Midlands
Planning Scheme in order to offer adequate protection to
important archaeological sites (as informed by the Southern M
Midlands Historical Archaeology Strategy).
e. Encourage external researchers to utilise the archaeological
resources (e.g. research, sites and collections) of the Southern
Midlands (as guided by the historical archaeology strategy). 0
20
 NYoLU iat eamiulcolrolarekmOcolelaled| Malt ice) irom al-iirelel- my iceli-\e hay 40d bey AU yc)
ae a js | Eee i |
ae ~~ CO)
; ds) le a i. oe op —- rhs
8 3 i : ca eS re z
: | «
| |e |
: ; The Green Ponds Watch House was constructed in 1847 to a
design by Colonial Architect William Porden Kay, adjacent to
the Green Ponds Police Office (now SMC Kempton Council
Offices). In the 1860s, the Kempton Council Chambers were
built between the two buildings. The watch house was largely
demolished in the late 1930s with only the former men’s lockup
retained and used for the next 80 years as a storage shed. In
2010, council Undertook a refurbishment of the building,
reinstating the original roof pitch and juxtaposing old and new
to form a contemporary space within the former ruin. Located
next to the council offices, this soace is intended for community
Use.
eye : Short/Medium/
| O INITIATIVES Long-term or
ongoing
Q. Encourage community use of the building for temporary exhibitions,
workshops, meetings etc. O
26
 R 7 tt El a. SS ~~
>), ere SS eee
“ Sy & . 7 Rr " Et = al : " oh 4 =
ae |
, =" . |
a v wr a
3 . =
SS, Seer ee
so a i bem : Council owns a_ substantial portfolio of public and
Me Site. oe . . ol ote . .
cet ee administrative heritage buildings, including the Oatlands and
Kempton Council Chambers and several small community
halls which are on the local (and sometimes state) heritage
registers.
These still serve an active public function and are vital parts
of their respective communities. Whilst their functional
management is part of other Council departments, the
management of their heritage values rests with the Heritage
Projects program and these buildings also offer potential for
public engagement on their heritage values.
eye : Short/Medium/
| | INITIATIVES Long-term or
ongoing
Q. Formulate a conservation management plan for the Oatlands
Council Chambers S
b. Seek opportunity to Undertake interoretation and public
engagement projects at heritage halls (etc.) owned by 0
Council.
2/
 rays ‘WT ds 2
fie 3
PLR S 6 i
ee ry

eS. Bequeathed to the former Brighton Council by Mr. Anton
Chauncy (husband of writer Nan Chauncy, nee Masterman)
in 1988, and assumed by Southern Midlands Council after
| 1993 amalgamations, the Chauncy Vale Wildlife Sanctuary ts
a 380-hectare (plus other incorporated nature reserves,
public and private) reserve, just east of Bagdad. The house
and home paddock of Chauncy Vale was later giffed to
Council by Anton’s daughter, Heather Chauncy. A sub-
committee of Council, the Chauncy Vale Management
Committee, manages the reserve under the gazetted
Chauncy Vale Management Plan. Council has an endorsed
business plan for the reserve, and support is provided by the
Friends of Chauncy Vale Inc. The sanctuary includes vast
tracts of natural bush, several caves, as well as the Day Dawn
cottage, home of the Chauncy/Masterman family from 1918
to 1988. Day Dawn Cottage Is perhaps the earliest example
of formed concrete domestic architecture in Tasmania.
Section 1.2 of the management plan states that one of the

ourposes of the plan ts fo:
a) provide for the conservation of the cultural and

natural environment of Chauncy Vale
Further, the State’s roles and responsibilities of Southern
Midlands Council in the management of Chauncy Vale
includes:
28
 b) restore and maintain the Chauncy house, insure the house and any
material lent for display, and develop a heritage program through its
Chauncy Vale Management Committee.
Cc) undertake, through its Management Committee, heritage research,
interpretation and education programs on its behalf subject both to
adherence with the principles of the ICOMOS Burra Charter, as well as
the input of a professional archaeologist where necessary.
The wishes of Anton Chauncy, as endorsed by his daughter Heather, included that:
Cc) the house, garden, and small garden, known as ‘the shrine’ be maintained together
with a display of Nan Chauncy’s work in the house.
The above purposes, responsibilities and wishes translate into the objectives of the
management plan, which provide detail on the conservation, protection and promotion of
the natural and cultural heritage values of Chauncy Vale. Of particular relevance to the
Southern Midlands Historic Heritage Strategy 2009-14, is the conservation of the Day Dawn
Cottage, the earlier Cherry Tree Cottage site, as well as the associated gardens and movable
cultural heritage.
In line with the management plan and the proposals contained therein (Section 4.4.2), and
In consultation with the management committee and Friends of Chauncy Vale Inc. the
following strategies should be pursued:
ore : Short/Medium/
| 2 INITIATIVES Long-term or
ongoing
Q. Review the Joint Management Plan 2010 and Statutory
Management Plan 1993. S
b. Develop a conservation management plan for Day Dawn
Cottage, inclusive of timeframes and resourcing M
requirements.
29
 NYoLU iat eamiulcolrolarekmOcolelaled| Malt ice) irom al-iirelel- my iceli-\e hay 40d bey AU yc)
: ete lee - . a se" ae? : {
| — t Ca i. Fs
er eee Se Fe = = :
he C <i a aa = s | 1
} a \, > - ——_—_—_ | :
; | er Gem SN — ee ae ja) oe
> er, SaaS 5 —
mates a Wh ‘were >
(ae on eee
_ ' eC ~
ie — i, Sai © 7
GE. .
a ie
>< g > ~
Council is the custodian of a collection of horse drawn carriages and associated equipment,
some of which Is owned by council and some is on long-term loan trom the family of a benefactor
who vested a collection info council’s care. A purpose-built faculty has been constructed on the
property adjoining the Kempton Recreation ground and a part of the collection is stored and
displayed in that building.
The horse drawn heritage initiative is being progressed by a sub-committee of the Green Ponds
Progress Association. A memorandum of understanding has been entered into with that
organisation which identifies a future develooment plan for the property within which the facility
is constructed. The equipment is used occasionally for soecial events and there are plans to
eventually open the facility for public visitation.
°1° ° Short/Medium/
| 3 INITIATIVES Long-term or
ongoing
Q. Continue to work with the Green Ponds Progress Association
sub-committee to support the develooment of future plans for 0
the facility and collection.
b. Scope opportunities for promoting the historic coaching industry
with other towns/sites along the Heritage Highway. O
30
 ee | si

r\ oe

| aaa

item: | yt
Council and the residents of Southern Midlands take great
pride in the heritage landscapes and sireetscapes of the
region, in particular the streetscapes of heritage villages.
Substantial projects have been undertaken over the years on
streetscape Improvement in all towns — the obvious being the
Undergrounding of power lines in Oatlands (coupled with
street signage, paving/kerbing and lighting projects). Towns
such as Kempton feature interpretive ‘gateway’ entry
statements and the notable topiary project of Oatlands aims
to perpetuate the historic topiaries of the St Peters Pass area.
An important principle to note, which is key to council's
decision-making processes, is that the historic towns of the
district need to remain as ‘livable’ towns — and that the
careful evolution of townscape character is needed to
ensure the livability of the townships — planning scheme
provisions are designed to reach that balance. Also, council
is well aware of the ‘overdoing’ principles of heritage
streetscape/townscape management and care is taken to
not to ensure that organically evolved heritage character Is
not falsely represented in an ‘over-prettied’ streetscape.

3]
 Important partnershios have been established between council and authorities such as Aurora
energy so that careful consideration is given to minimising (and indeed undoing) the heritage
Impact that utility lines (for instance) can have on streetscape values.
In the mid-1990s, a tourism study lamented that the landscape of the midlands was ‘one of the most
uninteresting in Tasmania’. This notion was countered in the 2007 Southern Midlands Heritage
Project, which articulated the significant evidence of thousands of years of human occupation
evident in the cultural landscape of the Southern Midlands and the cultural heritage values inherent
In such.
eye : Short/Medium/
| 4 INITIATIVES Long-term or
ongoing
Q. Continue to foster partnerships with utility companies for methods to
minimise/undo installations which have an unnecessary negative O
impact upon heritage streetscape/ townscapes.
b. Monitor opportunities for funding for the implementation of initiatives
to reduce/undo streetscape elements which have unnecessary O
impact upon heritage streetscape/ townscapes.
C. A working group consisting of council and community members to
orogress the Kempton Streetscape Plan. S
d. Initiate a process of identification of significant trees and plantings in
oublic areas of the municipal area and consider s
management/statutory protection options.
$ 3
’
" ‘. 2
: oer 4 by a ”
| : i / ) / j “ > :
‘en pon. Shy ®" | at
: : - ‘.: ~ .7 ‘
PN Sy ee
% \ 1 ' ——* | any
~ 5 ’ <3
3 i”
i | if fr |
: [ : |
 = .
; | | mien! ia
= ‘ ¥ |
Pe I) |
| aS | :
. a wt aun )
a’ EE | ee Di. 5
. La —— il
. | = ae ie
(f ES — ee, ih
———-4
e ————= —
a S
_ - Council holds a substantial collection of heritage items,
. =. including:
- Archaeological artifacts
- Corporate items (e.g. Chotographs, awards)
- Agricultural implements
- Architectural and interior decoration samples.
In 2007 Council adopted a heritage collections policy and a
key objective of the Heritage Officer position Is to manage
that collection and utilise it for disolay and research. A
substantial database has been populated and steps have
been taken to establish (and then increase) the online
oresence of the collection.
Part of the Oatlands Gaoler’s Residence has been fitted as
a collections store and there are ad-hoc storage facilities in
several other buildings, which is far from ideal. A vision of the
Midlands Economic Development and Land Use Strategy Is
to seek to establish a purpose-built/fitted facility for the
collection which may also have commercial opportunities
for storage or research.
Collaboration with the heritage Education and Skills Centre
on research projects utilising the collection Is also desired.
33
 Tole allen ullol(olare km Ove Used! Mulhirelilomal-lsirele[-MVicel(-\eh ayAel BLAU Yas.
ere : Short/Medium/
| 5 INITIATIVES Long-term or
ongoing
Qa. Continue fo refine, audit and implement heritage collection
orocedures further to council's heritage collection policy. O
b. — Establish an industry standard collection store to house council's
heritage collection. S
Cc, Ensure that all heritage collection display soaces are adequate and
appropriate for their purpose. O
d. Continue fo utilise council's heritage collection for research,
oublication and display. O
e, Continue partnerships with relevant agencies/groups/individuals with
an interest in heritage collections. O
f. Continue to pursue online availability of heritage collection data as a
oriority. O
g. Undertake a feasibility study and seek to establish a ‘commercial’
heritage/archaeological collections store to house council's
collection and fo offer collection management services to others on a S
for-profit basis.
h. Continue to support the Tasmanian Decorated Interiors initiative in
collaboration with relevant partners. O
a. s ec eee ee alee
i re »* NE Pa oy ~~ 2
Nig Hj ye we f wo. eet eS —
en Ys 8 | : Ie Ne 5 a te A * ae .
. Fs: — - oa “ali 504 E* ao noun f we =
4 ea) VA. ee ed |
af { pe er } firs aaron ro ge ery
34
 Toe Se atl aN s =|
i = : A. - NN </
. | 4 = f a i ol \y
te ae . < 4 4 F . F } Rin = n=
——* j ‘J a ES
ae —_ a ——— -
— ae. te. ec = i ee
a
ee a i
a 1 2
x Where possible, SMC’s Heritage Projects team integrates
student and community education programs in heritage
projects as a means of:
e Disseminating heritage information to the wider
community
e Assisting the community to understand, protect
and promote their local heritage
e Encouraging the interest of students and
researchers to utilise the heritage resources of the
Southern Midlands
Examples of successful heritage education projects by
SMC include regular school involvement, collaboration
with the Heritage Education and Skills Centre, U3A
lectures, National Trust Heritage Festival events and the
new and very successful Heritage and Bullock Festival.
35
 Tole allen ullol(olare km Ove Used! Mulhirelilomal-lsirele[-MVicel(-\eh ayAel BLAU Yas.
eye : Short/Medium/
| 6 INITlaTIVeS Long-term or
ongoing
Q. Continue to develop and stage education and public programs
attached to heritage projects, in particular the archaeology O
summer program and the Artist in Residence program.
b. Work with the Heritage Education and Skills Centre to promote the
heritage of the Southern Midlands in wider heritage education and O
Skills programs.
Cc. Where possible, assist students and researchers investigate and
oromote the heritage of the Southern Midlands O
d. When possible, include Southern Midlands activities in wider
heritage ‘festival’ programs such as the National Trust Heritage M
Festival, National Archaeology Week etc.
e. Work with local schools to include heritage themes into curriculum. O
f. Consider the develooment of a research bursary scheme where
value for money to council can be demonstrated in the support of S
undergaduate and postgraduate students.
g. Engage the public wherever possible in the planning and
implementation of heritage projects. O
h. Work with community groups to stage the annual Heritage and
Bullock Festival at Oatlands O
L. Stage an event in commemmeration of the 200'" anniversay of the
founding of Oatlands and Macquarie's second visit. M
kK. Enhance and improve existing interoetation to increase linkages
between heritage sites and improve visitor experiences. O
. Seek Opportunities for publications regarding Southern Midlands
heritage. Annual KPI's to include:
- Ashort publications O
- | major ‘monograph’ as part of an ongoing series
- Monthly news articles in local media
m. Work with property owners who volunteer fo particpate in an annual
‘open doors’ event allowing access to buildings not ordinarily open. O
36
 \.. SUeey ame! = BaP fe) |
Siete i 3 s Vueee (* 2 pe ecient: 9
SSS Wi, awe afl ik eee re a
oat 4 Sea a an ak Sas Rei ies = — CCS ee = Btn —
ee . : a f) Pi “ R RUE er ape |
See A a
% ye = Wr Fs
” M - & | i
= ed -
‘auZd/ Te . <<
— FH, 7 : q ‘ a VF ox |
) my Delve .
Ba 8, ee ae
————_ cere > «Sie a — | : . : : :
‘| | eee ee LS LD The Tourism Tasmania Historic Heritage Strategy 2012-2015
Qe (coe rr ee ee Setar ‘om | Ay
Ba oeeeeeeeeeeeEEmrimn summarised the appeal of historic heritage tourism in Tasmania:
eRe Geena See Oe nig Ee
SS Ge ORT SRE NT) EET LAO TNR aS sa
| Visitors to Tasmania are immersed in historic heritage; it’s
part of everyday life and the strong sense of place that is
Tasmania.
Historic heritage permeates the experiences of visitors to
Tasmania, whether as a backdrop, a setting or a direct
experience and combines with the state’s other
characteristic expenences of nature, adventure, food and
wine fo provide rich multi-layered experiences.
Tasmania has conserved the buildings, precincts and
townships of different historic periods, particularly colonial
times. Many are in their original setting without modern
Intrusions and still in use within the community.
Traditions and stories from the past are strong in Tasmanian
communities where Tasmanian families descended from
convict and colonial settlers still live. Records of the past
and movable heritage items are quite readily available
and well conserved with many in displays and museums.
Council concurs with that summary, however recognises that
historic heritage is not necessarily a static occurrence that will
draw visitors without some torm of captivating and dynamic
engagement tools to enhance the experience.
 Whilst it is Obvious that the Southern Midlands has a wealth of historic cultural heritage sites, both
privately and publicly owned, which have the potential to be integrated into tourism initiatives, a
strategic approach to the promotion and interpretation of these sites is required. It is recognised
that an unplanned and ad-hoc approach to heritage place interpretation Is rarely beneficial, and
that careful planning Is required to deliver a quality experience linked to wider initiatives — both
geographically and thematically. Uniformity in branding, alignment with statewide strategies and
meaningful well-planned delivery is essential.
The appeal of heritage tourism is demonstrated by the increase in visitation to Oatlands between
2009-2012. The number of visitor nights in Oatlands increased from 4,300 nights in 2009 to 8,100 nights
in 2010 (the year of the Callington Mill opening) — substantially above the state average growin. In
2011, visitation increased to 15,100 nights p.a. (i.e. fourfold in three years). This demonstrates the
appeal of heritage as a tourism asset. In 2009, the Tasmanian Tourism Industry Council engaged
EMRS to conduct a phone survey of 1,000 Tasmanians to determine what they thought the key
economic mainstay of Tasmania was. EMRS summarised that

Public perceptions in the 2009 survey are again that tourism has not only made the

greatest contribution to Tasmania’s growth in the past 5 years, but also that it has the

potential to do so during the next 5 years.
Despite the recent closure of the Central Tasmanian Tourism Centre, Council can still play a lead
role in the heritage tourism. In terms of built heritage tourism, as summarised above, the Southern
Midlands has plenty to offer and the statistics above demonstrate that the management and
bromotion of such Is effective. An independently formulated vision statement for the Southern
Midlands (SGC Economics, 2014) included the following statement:

Apart from agriculture, there are other areas of potential growth and development.

The municipality has a rich history and offers a wealth of heritage buildings and

landscapes. This is an important part of the region's identity and a key driver of the

local tourism industry. Council has shown leadership by taking business initiative.
Council sees linkages and partnerships as a key contributor to the success of builf heritage tourism
in the region, with a long-standing association with organisations such as the Heritage Highway
Tourism Association and the Beacons project as examples of the need for a local government to
think outside their own boundaries in order fo maximise exposure To a wide market.

38
 eye : Short/Medium/
17 Initiatives Long-term or
ongoing
Q. Better identify those places within Southern Midlands which have
the potential for integration into heritage tourism initiatives — both
geographically and thematically, with a particular focus on S
oublicly owned sites.
b. Continue to foster an alignment to statewide heritage tourism
strategies and principles. O
Cc. Ensure that the interpretation of Southern Midlands heritage
places Is modern, dynamic, unique and memorable. O
d. Seek linkages and cooperative heritage tourism projects with
other Councils within the sub-region. O
e. Promote the use of council owned heritage sites in regional and
statewide events/Testivals (even if not heritage focussed). O
f. Continue to implement and review consistent branding In all
SMC heritage tourism initiatives. O
g seek to work collaboritvely with local tourism operators to
maximise the inclusion of meaningful heritage experiences and 0
messages Into their operations/branding etc.
h Monitor, review and seek opportunitues for expansion of the
‘Oatlands Key’ system. O
39
 NYoLU iat eamiulcolrolarekmOcolelaled| Malt ice) irom al-iirelel- my iceli-\e hay 40d bey AU yc)
- yy Fe aed |
=) 4 =f aig Ie
:  ~ “a - ¥ ma | cence | a
28 ° Ferme ER | PER
So Zu er Wei “cal aaa eon =—=—
BE en le ine ca : Rt : v ' “he :
ae ta al y | »
Se 0 ll Os
a a!!! UL i
Dk =e “" Ra / OZ Bi ; ¥ ty ‘i =
es . me vay : i ¢ _
27 27 |
a << ( y
ys es,
Council recognises that there are countless heritage/ culture/arts interest groups and individuals
within (and outside of) Tasmania who have an interest in the Southern Midlands and other
common heritage themes. It is the intent of council fo wherever possible work with such groups
towards the common goal of researching, preserving and promoting the heritage values of the
region.
Within the region there are a number of heritage groups who provide valuable services and
support to the public in promoting and preserving the heritage of the region, these include the
various local historical societies, small museums and individuals.
Initiatives such as the Centre for Heritage at Oatlands, and the Heritage Hub have a primary
mandate to engage with and collaborate with partner groups.
>
>a
, . -
Ge :
~ 9 a
7 : "4 2
|
rey STE v
Sh.
40
 eye : Short/Medium/
| 8 INITIATIVES Long-term or
ongoing
Q. Provide support wherever possible for groups and Individuals with
an interest in the heritage of the Southern Midlands. 0
b. Work with agencies such as the Tasmanian Heritage Council,
National Trust, Heritage Tasmania, Destination Southern
Tasmania, Tourism Tasmania, TMAG/QVMAG etc. on the 6
management of heritage within the Southern Midlands and/or
related themes.
Cc. Collaborate whererver possible with the Centre for Heritage at
Oatlands (Heritage Education and Skills Centre) on initiatves of 0
mutual interest.
d. Promote intra-council collaboration on heritage/arts/cultural
projects through other council strategives such as the Arts 0
Strategy etc.
4]
 e e ; - — —v

Review of the strategy & reporting -”
It is intended that the Southern Midlands Council Historic — NX =
Heritage Strategy be reviewed should any circumstance ai ies VO Ls if AN .
result in any major changes to the heritage program of the . "ae —_— jz. oa \.
framework in which it operates. ae 7 Ee
A monthly report to council via the Manager Heritage tea! Deratiioee 1 =
Projects report is fo monitor and report upon progress of a Via == =~ od
implementing this strategy. By y me , i ta a * 4m
An annual report on the achievements against this strategy Is | : eg bs ‘ioe
to be provided to council and any interested stakeholders | Pa aha
(and published on council’s website}. | \
ofom Til [rolaakwemiselarele(-)m@al-Jii1ele(-i ake) (-Loq Maem Olea fo) ol-) ay40N Ts

Southern Midlands Council

Heritage Program

smc@southernmidlands.tas.gov.du

www.southernmidiands.tas.gov.au/heritage/
