8 > * | . -
—_ “a |
EST by \S ie eS a
Sy = aa
+> . ’ ; wa is ——
el «’ ' 7 4 ha ; 145°
“Ne” ne = i.
am = ze » bi ‘ ie: Sa
Page On bal , . en
| = . { ) te SS, =
~ ; a
: ental 2 See Se
A plan for Council
and Community
Endorsed by Southern
Midlands Council
SEPTEMBER 2014
 ‘oamnnconeche i
| 4 __ = ee a Be

iw Cl

— earner

yeh * pes * _ — ee. ~ 3

ran - -
SS =
A large part of our future is in our past........
Southern Midlands Council is established as objectives of the Land Use Planning and
one of 29 Tasmanian municipal councils Approvals Act 1993 (LUPAA), fo the
under the Local Government Act 1993. management of one-off and ongoing
Comprising of 2611 square kilometres if Is heritage projects as a means of value-
one of the larger municipal regions in adding to the heritage assets of the
Tasmania, however with a population of just municipal region.
Over 6000 people, has one of the smallest This document is guided by SMC’s Strategic
populations. Plan 2014-2023, as well as other relevant
Nonetheless, the Southern Midlands has a Strategic planning initiatives, such as the
wealth of historic heritage which enriches Oatlands Integrated Development Strategy
the community, with 255 places on the and the Midlands Economic Development
Tasmanian Heritage Register, 244 places on and Land Use Strategy as well as a number
the local heritage schedule, and a proposal of tourism plans and _ strategies towards
to expand the local schedule to 420 places. which Council has an interest. This olan also
This document has been developed to considers the interests of various external
guide Southern Midlands Council (SMC} stakeholders having Interest in the heritage
towards a more strategic and integrated of Ihe region (le. the Fasmanian Heritage
approach to heritage management. For at Council, Tourism Tasmania, the Heritage
least 20 years, SMC has undertaken various Highway Fourism Region Association) and
roles as a heritage manager - from various heritage interest groups as well as
development appraisal pursuant to the Integrating, where appropriate, state plans,
objectives and benchmarks.
2
 = ee 6 ame
a. ., | eee
5 Tie oe SMC's involvement in heritage takes three broad streams:
sr a om e Asa Planning Authority under the Local Government
Act 1993, SMC Is to administer the = statutory
requirements of heritage places in the municipal area
under the Land Use Planning and Approvals Act 1993
(LUPAA — Part 2, Objective 2g), and as a referral body
under the Historic Cultural Heritage Act 1995 (HCHA).

e As the owner and manager of a number of significant
heritage sites and public soaces, SMC voluntarily acts
to preserve, utilise and promote the heritage values
of these places through various heritage projects.

e As an advocate within the community — promoting
best practice standards and encouraging the
community fo participate in the management of their
own heritage.

e As the owner of the Centre for Heritage at Oatlands
(CFH), which incorporates Heritage Building Solutions
(HBS - @ commercial heritage building, restoration
and consultancy enterprise) and the Heritage
Education and Shills Centre (HESC -— a not-for-profit
heritage skills training organisation). Note that CFH
operates under ifs own business plan and board,
however crossover initiatives will be included in this
plan as appropriate).

The primary document which governs Southern Midlands
Council's heritage (and other) initiatives is the Strategic Plan
2014 to 2023, which is updated every ten years (with four-
yearly review). From this, the Annual Plan sets shorter-term
targets, and the Annual Report reports on the outcomes
and progress of such. Alongside these documents, the
Community Plan (updated every 5-10 years) assists in the
governance and delivery of these initiatives.
3
 Tole allen miullol(olare km OvolUlared! Mult irolicom al-Viirelel-MVicel (leh ayAen oyAel ke. ee
In relation to heritage, the following sections of the Strategic Plan are directly relevant:
| _theme |i. Key strategy/action Dept.
2.2.1. Increase the number| 2.2.1.1. peck opporonmes te Upp me develooment and growth of a wide range of CMBP
of tourists visiting and OUFSAMIN TNE SOUTAETN MIGIANGS
spending money in the seek opportunities to further develop the Callington Mill Precinct as well as the
municipality 2.2.1.2. we ; HPS
Oatlands Military Precinct
, Maintain support for viable Council business operations such as Callington Mill Business
2.3. Business 2.3.1.10. Precinct, Heritage Building Solutions and Heritage Education & Skills Centre GM
Manage the heritage values of Council owned heritage buildings according to
3.1.1.1 , HPS
affordable best practice.
3112 Work in Partnership with the State Government to ensure the strategic long-term HPS
3.1.1. Maintenance and “"* Imanagement of publicly owned heritage sites.
restoration of significant
public heritage assets. Urgently seek to accelerate the process of relocating the swimming pool from the
3.1.1.3 oor GM
historic Oatlands gaol site.
31414 Seek to establish the Oatlands gaol site as an historic/archaeological education HPS
a centre.
3.1.2. Act as an advocate 3.1.2.1 |Support and monitor ongoing development of the Heritage Skills Centre in Oatlands.
for heritage and provide
support to heritage 31.29 Facilitate and investigate opportunities for assisting heritage property owners in HPS
oroperty owners. a conserving heritage places alongside sustainable ongoing usage.
Undertake and encourage research and publications on the heritage values of the
3.1.3.1 HPS
Southern Midlands.
3.1.3. Investigate, Undertake the effective heritage interpretation, education & Communication
document, understand 3.1.3.2 programs HPS
and promote the heritage
| f the South , - , , ,
Midlonds ecu 3.1.3.3 |Continue to manage and utilise Councils heritage resources and collections.
Support the occupancy / use of Council owned heritage buildings and spaces by arts
3.1.3.4 eager HPS
& crafts groups who specialise in heritage crafts.
3.3.1. Ensure that the
cultural diversity of the Identify, and promote the Cultural heritage of the Southern Midlands through festivals
, 3.3.1.1 C&CD
Southern Midlands is and events.
maximised.
Continue to support the State Government’s Regional Planning Initiative and to work
3.4.1.1 fin co-operation within the Southern Tasmanian region to finalise a new planning DES
scheme.
3.4.1 A regulatory Encourage the State Government fo provide more direction to the planning system
environment that is , , ; _. ; ,
, 3.4.1.2 |through the introduction of more State Planning Policies, State Planning Directives and} DES
supportive of and enables , ; ..
., common statewide planning scheme provisions.
appropriate develooment
Make use of the Joint Land Use Planning Initiative (JLUPI) outcomes to develop the
3.4.1.3 , DES
local content for the new planning scheme.
4.10.1. Increase the
educational and
employment opportunities | 4.10.1.2. jProvide heritage skills learning opportunities through the centre for heritage. HPS
available within the
Southern Midlands.
4
 estrone oun iri Heo Stay 2142018
ma / * Statutory
TN aa\ Heritage
, , x Management
Please note that the Draft Southern Midlands Planning Interim Scheme 2014 is currently
under review by the Tasmanian Planning Commission. Once approved, the new
planning scheme will require a review of this section of the historic heritage strategy.
This will be provided to Council for information in due course.
Pursuant to the objectives (Schedule 1, or earlier, and are only now receiving
objective 2g) of the planning process systematic updating. The schedule in the
established by LUPAA, Planning Authorities current Southern Midlands Planning Scheme
are required to conserve those buildings, 1998 is essentially a collation of the heritage
areas or other places which are of scientific, lists that existed  pre-1993 = council
aesthetic, architectural or historical interest, amalgamation planning schemes, such as
or otherwise special cultural value. From this the Green Ponds Planning Scheme 1985,
requirement, local planning schemes. in (part of) the Richmond s.46_ Planning
Tasmania have evolved (to varying content Scheme 1993, and the Municipality of
and degrees) heritage provisions and Oatlands Planning Scheme 1988. There is
schedules of heritage places through which substantial crossover with the Tasmanian
this objective is given currency. This section Heritage Register (THR).
will discuss the current state of the heritage
provisions and heritage schedule of the The pending new planning scheme contains
Southern Midlands Planning Scheme 1998. a mechanism to avoid ‘double processing’
of applications for places listed on both the
Mostly, these schedules have arisen from old THR and the local planning scheme
National Trust, Register of the National schedule, placing all responsibility for
Estate, Royal Australasian Institute of considering heritage issues in the hands of
Engineers and Tasmanian Heritage Register the Tasmanian Heritage Council.
listings. Many lists date from the mid-1990s,
9
 ‘oominacona itor oe
, op Under the Historic Cultural Heritage Act 1995, The Tasmanian
+ ad —— Heritage Council (THC) are a referral body for applications

fe =I sf . — for works on places listed on the Tasmanian Heritage Register

EM Rie. wat Bae _ (THR). Planning Authorities manage the application process
—_— —— — and must include THC conditions, advice or refusals on a

Z : — a planning permit for works to listed places.

%« _ | >

| ——— Council manages the heritage values of places listed solely

we ptm tr = on Schedule 4 (Heritage) of the Southern Midlands Planning

_ ™ » ¥ we Scheme 1998 (the scheme) and Part 10 of the scheme

 _ a eK oe, ae establishes provisions listing the matters which Council must

. : take into consideration when assessing applications for use or

} Fr pees ae es develooment of a heritage place listed on Schedule 4.

| tt ! As a Planning scheme provisions, exemptions and discretionary
aL. = triggers are discussed below.
In 2007, in conjunction with the THC, Council undertook the
Southern Midlands Heritage Project (GHD), which sought to
review existing heritage lists and to refine/Update/clarity
listings as well as provided a clearer designation of ‘state’
and ‘local’ levels of significance consistent with state policy.
A number of places have been added to the THR.
Recommendations for new local listings have been fed into
the formulation of the new draft planning scheme. After
extensive consultation proposed new local listings have been
added fo the draft planning scheme.
The table below details the number of places on each
heritage list (excluding heritage areas - discussed below).
rs
Places listed; proposed
Tasmanian Heritage Register | 255A |
a
* Includes 190 places which are on the THR
4 Includes 14 duplicate entries which are part of a consolidated entry
*A total of 420 local listings are included in the draft interim planning
scheme arising from a review of Schedule 4 (additions and removals as well
as all THR listed places).
6
 ssn cnt at a
eritage areas iis ~
Clause 9.1 of the scheme details soecial planning provisions —w Se ms )
for properties within Historic Precinct Special Areas (HPSA). ' ' x, ate —
These are designated areas within the centre of Oatlands, or = =o—0 oe
Kempton and Campania, as well as the ‘Heritage Mile’ at ot r f- rt.
Mangalore, which contain a high concentration of Schedule =
4 places. Akin to ‘desired future character statements’, — i
these provisions give guidelines as to allowable develooment .
within these areas as a means of maintaining (in addition to Lost Heritage
heritage fabric) the overall character of these precincts.
Many of these provisions override standard permitted uses
and trigger a discretionary planning approvals process. ez i
These areas have been reviewed, and others added which he ee Se
form part of the draft planning scheme. '. Aa
Some years ago, council's Municipal Architect developed am, | ,
‘Design Guidelines for Georgian Buildings in the Main Street 3
of Kempton & Oatlands’. Whilst this has no statutory standing,
this is Used as a consistent benchmark for the assessment of '
development within those areas. The guidelines provide a ee
practical interoretation and elaboration of the Planning ee: S = eS Wy
Scheme provisions, as they should generally be applied to c. ~ *
Kempton and Oatlands. Council is currently drafting new _ |
guidelines, in tandem with amending Its current planning ‘ , -
scheme in respect of revised HPSA’s (refer below). ed = o
Proposed expanded and new Heritage Areas
In 2014 Council has pursued a number of amendments to its current planning scheme (the
Southern Midlands Planning Scheme 1998) in regard to heritage precincts. These are:
e Tailoring the heritage precinct provisions at Oatlands to specifically refer to Its
oredominant Georgian character.
e Expanding the Oatlands precinct.
e Identifying that portion of the precinct around Callington Mill as a specific precinct.
e Expanding the landscape protection special area previously extending 100 metres from
the highway to cover most of the rural land between the highway and the town.
e Expanding the heritage precinct at Campania.
e Reducing the heritage precinct at Kempton, slightly.
e Creating a new landscape precinct at Colebrook on the hill face that forms and
important backdrop to the Pugin designed St Patrick’s Church.
/
 SS
The development application process Parts 9.1 and 9.11 of the current Planning
Council's Planning Officer is responsible for Scheme relate to the Heritage Precinct
the administration of the statutory planning Special Areas and the Heritage Mile
and referral process involving heritage Precinct Special Area respectively.
places in Southern Midlands. Any use or
development (as defined by the scheme) of Nonetheless, the HAC is an_ optional
places listed on Schedule 4 triggers the committee, and has not been in formation
requirement for a discretionary planning since the early 2000s.
application pursuant to Clause 11.5. Under
s.o/ Of LUPAA, any discretionary application Under the Historic Cultural Heritage Act
must be publicly advertised for fourteen 1995, any development application on a
days. place listed on the Tasmanian Heritage

Register must be referred to the THC,
Historic buildings and works listed on (unless the Planning Authority is delegated
schedule 4, or any place contained within a to deal with the application or unless a
HPSA are subject to certain provisions, which certificate of exemption has been issued
aim to measure the impact of any proposal by Heritage Tasmania) and advertised by
upon the historic cultural heritage value of the Planning Authority (s.34) for fourteen
the place. Part 10.1 of the scheme, which days. Any representations received must
relates to the individual places listed on the be forwarded to the THC, and the Planning
scheme's heritage schedule, incorporates Authority is responsible for service of notices
ICOMOS Australia Burra Charter principles Upon applicants and representors as part
into the planning assessment process, and of the develooment application process.
requires that Council take Into consideration
any advice received from the Heritage Schedule 1 of the scheme (Exemptions
Advisory Committee (HAC) or other expert from Planning Approval) makes specific
opinion. reference to Schedule 4 places (and those
within a HPSA) and removes some standard
Clause 10.1.(h) of the planning scheme exemptions (i.e. interior works) in order to
makes allowance for the formation of this further scrutinise the protection of heritage
committee. The HAC is prescribed to consist values.
of:
e One or more elected members of Although adequately able to administer
Council heritage planning applications, the
e The Municipal Architect provisions of Clauses 9.1 and 10.1 are
e Three other persons resident within outdated, as their process of referral does
the community appointed by Council not reflect current standards. The
with qualifications, — experience provisions do not make reference to
and/or a demonstrated — strong Tasmanian Heritage Council (except
interest in architecture, historic studies indirectly in 10.1(d) other expert opinion).
or related disciplines. In addition, the HAC was disbanded
several years ago. These issues are to be
8
 ee NYolUal-JeamislielColare km OcolUlaved| Malt ireliromal-Wsirelel-Micel (leh ayaen- oyA0l ke.
addressed with the draft planning scheme. Future directions
Several major projects are currently
In practice, the current referral system has underway which will have an impact upon
involved referring the application to the the way council undertakes statutory
Municipal Architect for comment if the heritage managemert. These include:
place Is listed solely on Schedule 4 (i.e. of
local significance only). In recent years, - The alignment with state and
however, Council has sought advice from regional planning initiatives, in
Heritage Tasmania Heritage Advisors particlar the draft Southern Midlands
instead. This is an informal mechanism Planning Scheme, which will require
which may or may not fit with future reforms a review of this section of the historic
of Heritage Tasmania policy. heritage strategy to align with new
provisions and process arising from
Recommendations/advice is provided to the new scheme.
Council in terms of whether the proposed
development IS contrary to Clauses 9.] or _ The Midlands Economic Devel-
10.1 of the planning scheme, and Council opment and Land Use Strategy —
makes a decision in-line with (Or against) this some of the recommendations and
recommendation. lf a referral from the actions from that strategy are
Tasmanian Heritage Council, in respect of a relevant to historic heritage
THR listed place, refuses an application, management (both statutory and
than the nranasced davealanment is rafiicad project streams)
Aboriginal Heritage )
In addition to the historic cultural heritage - Eyture reviews of the Oatlands
provisions of the planning scheme, Clause Integrated Development. Strategy
10.2 makes provision for the referral of as well as similar strategies which
development that may have an impact on may be undertaken for other historic
aboriginal heritage. Schedule 4 lists 3 sites of .
_ centres through the municipal
known aboriginal heritage values (which region
were derived from the Register of the )
National Estate). Clause 10.2 is constructed , ,

, - Heritage Tasmania's HELP program
loosely enough to ensure that aboriginal which aims to engage local
heritage referrals are undertaken, although ; ; ,

govenmment in the implementation
there is a need fo beitter clarify when these and synthesis of the amended
might be required, as per the provisions of Historic Cultural Heritage Act 1995
the Aboriginal Relics Act 1975. Although ,

_ and provide ongoing support to
Aboriginal cultural heritage is beyond the councils and planners
scope of this strategy, It is recommended )
that SMC give greater consideration fo Ms The historic heritage strategy will require
responsibility as both a planning authority , , re

occasional review as these other initiatives

and landowner towards the protection of

_ Orogress.
Aboriginal cultural heritage.

9
 NYoLU i at=eamiulcolrolarekmOcolelaled| Malt ire)ilomal-iirelel-myiceli-\ehayAen Ey AenE-} ee
*1e ° Short/Medium/
ongoing
Update the Southern Midlands Council Historic Heritage
Strategy 2014-18 to reflect the provisions of the new Southern S
Midlands Planning Scheme once the scheme is in-place.
Continue to participate in relevant legislative review processes
or relevance fo historic and aboriginal heritage managemert.
Cc. Ensure that historic heritage is considered in the Midlands
Economic Development and Land Use Strategy process and 5
other strategic planning documents as they progress.
Explore resource sharing with other councils for effective and
consistent statutory heritage management.
Develop ‘practice notes’ and other advice for heritage
property owners To assist In Managing the values of their
properties.
f. Liaise with Aboriginal Heritage Tasmania for more effective
and comprehensive systems for managing aboriginal heritage
values in the Southern Midlands.
Key To Initiative timings
Short term (S) — Expected to be completed during the life of the strategy.
Medium term (M) - Expected to be commenced (and possibly completed)
during the life of the strategy.
Long term (L) - The eventual goal, which may be completed during the life of
the strategy, however is more likely to occur after 2018 (with short and medium
term initiatives working towards that).
Ongoing (O) — Undertaken throughout the life of the strategy and expected to
continue beyond 2018.
10
 sent nt nie
ee ince Si
pees S52 tee S
ee — A Se
Laas ee
: oa (ee es
, | Fe \ areal
| ae " “i 33 aA
tt Sisiage \\ YS -" or . %
= = mie | | s4 =<
aE ae Fh) %
ao a Van Si
— ¥ = oR 15 alee
Besides council's responsibility to manage initiatives are driven by a number of
historic heritage as per the previous section, individual plans, such as conservation
the strategic plan includes a number of non- management plans, business plans and
statutory heritage projects. interoretation plans, which are listed here as
relevant to each project. The following
The support or heritage projects is outside figure demonstrates that heritage projects
Council's core mandate da_= planning are driven by Council's recognition of the
qguthority, yet is recognised by Council as benefits to the Community's sense of place,
one of the key strategies in developing and education and tourism opportunities, and
promoting the cultural heritage of the how collaboration and crossover with
region in order to reap the flow on benefits initiatives in these other streams are essential
in terms of community sense of place, for the success of heritage projects:
education and tourism opportunities. Whilst
Striving tO demonstrate best-practice
heritage management, Council acknow-
ledges the flow on benefits as an essential
part of the rationale for heritage projects, Community
and the immeasurable benefits that arise
from such. Heritage
projects
The heritage projects initiated and ,
managed by Council are many and varied -
Qa brief description of the background,
current state, and future directions of these
projects will be provided here. These
1]
 ‘oomideacorciocho iter
\ ;
at ‘Ni bag! ap ee e . ,
aw
™ aa ‘
SS -* sual
a bee
ain Ge ae
masts ae ae
— eo —_
ia. *k te
Note that the day-to-day operation of the Callington Mill
and associated activities are managed by a separate
business unit of Council, as guided by various business
planning and routine maintenance/operational documents.
The inclusion in the historic heritage strategy is intended to
guide projects of relevance’ to  the~ mill which
enhance/maintain its historic heritage values.
The Callington Mill complex is a substantially intact wind and
steam mill complex, established in 1837. The mill tower Is the
icon of Oatlands, and the array of extant associated
buildings makes this a very unique industrial heritage
complex. Since being purchased by the State Government
in 1964, the last forty or so years have seen various phases of
restoration at the Callington Mill Site. Periodic small-scale
restoration and investigation of re-establishment of the mill
was undertaken during the 1970s and 1980s. The first major
restoration phase was in 1988, when a Bicentennial Grant
(also supported by Coca Cola Amatil) allowed stabilisation
and access fitout of the windmill tower. Throughout the
1990s, Opportunistic small-scale restoration continued, with a
conservation management plan being developed in 1994,
and in 1999 the tower cap and fan wheel were added.
In 2010 a $2.4m reconstruction and precinct develooment
project was implemented, which refitted the mill tower as
the only working Lincolnshire-style windmill in the Southern
12
 ee Tole aT=-eaWiulcolrelarekmeColUlaled Maltice)sromal-iirelel-myiceli-\ehayAen oy Aen |
Hemisphere. The milling operation provides flour (and other milled products) statewide and other
national (and potentially international) markets are currently being explored for a range of
organic and chemical-free products.
The Central Tasmanian Tourism Centre and Mill Keeper's Cafe operate from the former mill owner’s
house and the granary and stables are used for ancillary mill functions and interpretation. Tours of
the milling operation are run 7 days per week and the centre averages around 50,000 visitors per
year.
= ' , _— ae
i.
vat =
4 .
*1e ° Short/Medium/
ongoing
Review and update the interoretation media for Callington
mill, including inclusion of interpretaiton on the steam mill, non-
English media and interpretation focussed at children.
Develop the front portion of the stables as a temporary
exhibition soace for community use. S
Cc. Finalise any outstanding heritage aspects of the Callington Mill
Master Plan and Precinct Plan/Strategy. S
13
 Ses
MEAG) Ge ag)” 3
di ae 4
eg eee
—— ae
Waa: 2a K) I | aT =i)
o-, Ikon 1h...
BIE jl a
ere —_—=
wa ven
vas 7
Owned by Southern Midlands Council, and the largest
building remaining of the Oatlands Military Precinct, is the
1837 Oatlands Gaol complex. Comprising of the two-storey
Georgian Gaoler’s Residence, as well as a c2000m? former
gaol yard and the lower portion of the formerly 6-metre high
sandstone perimeter wall, these are the remains of the
largest regional colonial gaol in Tasmania. Most of the gaol
buildings were demolished in 1937, and in 1954 the yard was
filed to accommodate the municipal in-ground swimming
pool.
The pool ts still in use, and the Gaoler’s Residence has been
vacant for at least 20 years. The pool is considered to have
exceeded Its practical working life, and a working group has
been formed to explore the options for establishing a new
pool elsewhere — demolition of the old pool would then
essentially free up the Gaol to be restored and promoted as
a heritage site. The Southern Midlands Recreation Plan
(2006) explored some of these options, and a feasibility
study has been completed. A site for the new facility Is
owned by Council and develooment approvals are in
place.
The Gaoler’s Residence has been restored as part of a
$750,000 project and now houses the SMC Heritage Projects
Office, exhibition and museum space as well as an
14
 ee Tole aT=-eaWiulcolrelarekmeColUlaled Maltice)sromal-iirelel-myiceli-\ehayAen oy Aen |
archaeological artifact laboratory and store. An interpretation plan has been partially
implemented and the building is near-ready for public access as guided by the Oatlands
Gaol Use and Develooment Plan. The building is utilised as part of Arts Tasmania's Artist in
Residence program.
Whilst the gaol yard still houses the swimming pool, approximately 1/3 of the yard has been
reclaimed as part of the historic site and basic landscaping and interoretation has been
installed. The gaol arch, which was moved to High Street in 1939, has been reinstated in Its
original location at the front of the gaol complex. The yard is envisaged to be used as freely
accessible public soace, supplementing use of the building.
Further to the recommendations of the Oatlands Gaol Use and Develooment Plan, there is a
need for further business planning to determine best-ouftcome management of the
building/site into the future fo ensure that community investment Is maximised.
A broad concept document has been developed (but not yet endorsed) which seeks to
utilise the gaol as a centre for learning relating to heritage, trade skills, archaeology and
museum related fields — exploration of partnerships with the Centre for Heritage may act to
orogress that concept.
SS —
SS ——S_ ————
7 a
————————— 2 ————} —— =
—————— ———————
” eee } fee A I
» jj elle u wake al oP ‘ “f a Bf Ai ote of Jags .
wri NS a sia pint ‘RESSE 0 IPEDS PSB eae san
| | rhe ‘ “ oi 5 a) ey oA
ee _ on re * |
15
 Tole allen miullol(olare km OvolUlared! Mult irolicom al-Viirelel-MVicel (leh ayAen oyAel ke. ee
ore ° Short/Medium/
ongoing
Continue to seek funding for the relocation of the swimming
pool. S
Finalise the implementation of the Oatlands Gaol
Interoretation plan. S
C. Continue to make the building available for Artist in Residence
and other cummunity based events/uses (as per develooment
plan and use policy).
Continue to undertake historical and archaeolgoical research
on the site and related themes.
Continue to seek funding for the overall Oatlands Gaol project
through internal and external sources.
f. Scope business opportunities for the long-term sustainable use
of the Oatlands Gaol, in-line with other local and multi-regional
heritage and tourism initiatives
Develop a detailed archaeological management strategy
and landscape/use plan with the assumption that the pool will M
eventually be removed.
h. Seek council endorsement of the concept and continue to
refine the master plan/end-use plan based on the current
broad concepts for a heritage, trades, archaeology & M
museum skills centre.
Relocate the swimming pool and implement the landscape
olan. M
j. Implement the refined long term for a heritage, trades,
archaeology & museuM skills centre with maximised public use 7
and access.
16
 —* . |
y 4 ae - — . — - a aoe
- eee, S ) ae 2)
; + aa — ss i:
es , Ge ee ee
ne = f s .

ie - he a 3 ) :

a ips i - ®. es

pa iE ' eae 4 A oe

petite, S57 eae ne

Lao “eee ys e het gee ro ee

a te eee oS by tae tne

a ee Tes Sete ee

DN, o7 ae i et a i

ee pee A

‘4 a Fy te RS Ned

rad Mine as Bo Wee
In May 2012, Southern Midlands Council purchased 79 High
Street, Oatlands — an 1108 square metre parcel of land,
containing the former Oatlands Commissariat Store, the
Oatlands Guard House archaeological site, and a cl87/0-
1880s shop and cottage fronting High Street (see initiative 5).
Council had resolved to purchase the place based on the
exceptional level of heritage value of the place and the
desire to keep the place in public ownership and present It
as part of a suite of the earliest government buildings at
Oatlands (namely together with the Oatlands Gaol and
Supreme Court House).
All buildings on the place are in an advanced state or
dereliction and immediate conservation actions are
required in order fo halt deterioration with the view of
restoration (as guided by a conservation management
plan).
The commissariat is a large space In a very prominent
position relating to High Street and has the remains of a
massive baker’s oven (c1880s) attached. The building offers
significant potential to create meaningful public soace with
supplementary interpretation and possible reinvigoration of
the baker’s oven. Such a use would link with the original use
of the building -I.e. provisioning the town.

17
 NYoLU i at=eamiulcolrolarekmOcolelaled| Malt ire)ilomal-iirelel-myiceli-\ehayAen Ey AenE-} ee
The site also has a high level of archaeological potential, being the site of the guard house
(demolished c1975) of which substantial remains were found during an archaeological test-
trenching program in 2013, also the military sundial, sentry box and the convict stocks (a
very unique type of archaeological site).

*1e ° Short/Medium/
ongoing
oo Make safe the site and weatherproof the buildings.

Seek funding opportunities through internal and external
SOUrCces

Cc, Seek Opportunities to use the place as a training site In
conjunction with the Heritage Education and Skills Centre.
Explore partnership opportunities with relevant
stakeholders/interest groups.
Implement the recommendations of the CMP to return the
place to a habitable state (Undertaking short and medium SM
term works at least).

f. Develop an interoretation plan for the site, which considers fit
with other local and state heritage/tourism initiatives. M
Scope business opportunities for the long-term sustainable use
of the commissariat (possibly incorporating the shop and
cottage), in-line with other local and multi-regional heritage M
and tourism initiatives.

h. Establish an adaptive reuse for the building, maximising public
access and appreciation of heritage values as part of the suite
of early colonial administrative buildings at Oatlands — with full
, , . , M
Implementation of the recommendations of the conservation
management, interpretation and business plans.

18
 — A ; : " = — oe
Sek ~ b =< : 7 7 + :., pa |
~ ee eg Senen -_ . = | ae | Lp on
TS ——s a _
As part of the Oatlands Commissariat title (79 High Street,
Oatlands), this building comprises a small c.1860 cottage,
which was extended towards the street in cl885 to add a
classically Victorian shopftront.
Despite being In a very good position for a commercial
venture (frontage to central High Street) the building is in a
very substantial state of decay and is currently
uninhabitable. This building was included in the Oatlands
Commissariat and 79 High Street Conservation
Management Plan, which has set recommendations for a
range of prioritised works to the building and policies for its
log-term conservation.
The level of historic heritage significance of this building is
less than that of the commissariat and works costing
estimates indicate that if will be more costly to restore this
building than the commissariat, which requires careful
consideration as to how funds are expended on the wider
site.
Options for privatisation of the building have been
workshopped by Council however any such moves must
consider the conservation, interpretation, support and
access to the commissariat building and wider site.
19
 NYoLU i at=eamiulcolrolarekmOcolelaled| Malt ire)ilomal-iirelel-myiceli-\ehayAen Ey AenE-} ee
*1e ° Short/Medium/
ongoing
oo Make safe the site and weatherproof the building.

Seek funding opportunities through internal and external
SOUrCces

Cc, Seek Opportunities to use the place as a training site In
conjunction with the Heritage Education and Skills Centre.
Explore partnership opportunities with relevant
stakeholders/interest groups.
Implement the recommendations of the CMP to return the
place to a habitable state (Undertaking short and medium SM
term works at least).

f. Explore opportunities for use of the building as ancillary soace
in support of the end-use of the Commissariat, or other M
commercial ventures (including possible privatisation).

20
 - a
— ee
> — =
r Pe.
; — sl
i == = )
——- ro
~-d | :
| ~
: | -
The Oatlands Supreme Court House (1829) is owned by SMC,
and is one of the oldest Supreme Court Houses in Australia.
It is in remarkably original condition and offers significant
potential for use as a facility to interpret the historic themes
relevant to the Oatlands Military Precinct and associated
buildings. The building was acquired from the National Trust
In 2007, although Council had tenure of the building since
2002. With the building comes a collection of chattels (on
loan from the National Trust), which derive from the 1910-
1977 phase of the building.
Due to the intact nature of the building, an analysis of
building fabric was undertaken in 2003 In a bid to better
Understand the building, and to plan future works. A
structural assessment was also undertaken in that year,
which lead to a structural stabilisation and essential works
program. Further non-essential works were undertaken in
late 2008. In 2006 an interpretation and public access plan
was developed with the aim of determining public
perceptions of what best the building could be used for,
and to suggest interpretive themes and media which could
effectively deliver the heritage significance.
With a collection of objects associated with the Oatlands
Court House (contents as well as archaeological artifacts), in
2007 Council commissioned a preservation survey of the
2 |
 NYoLU i at=eamiulcolrolarekmOcolelaled| Malt ire)ilomal-iirelel-myiceli-\ehayAen Ey AenE-} ee
collection and the locations proposed to store and display that collection.
With the development of the interoretation plan and the preservation survey, an
implementation strategy was developed to clarify minor conflict between those reports and
to guide the implementation of the first stages of interoretation. The first stages of the
interoretation plan have been implemented and the building is opened by volunteers as a
small museum showcasing the military, court and police history of the district. The building Is
also open for pre-booked tours and special community events, as per the Oatlands Gaol
and Supreme Court House Use Policy.
A small kitchen, equal-access toilet and storeroom were recently constructed as a
standalone building to support volunteer and community use.
*1e ° Short/Medium/
ongoing
Establish a volunteer staffing program to open the building at
least 4 days per week on an ongoing basis
oe Make available for community use as per the use policy. 0
Cc, Review and continue the implementation of the Oatlands
Supreme Court House Interpretation Project (subject to further M
end-use/business planning
Continue to foster partnerships with relevant stakeholders for
the use of the building as a small museum and interpretation
centre.
Seek funding (whether internal or external) for the
development of a business plan for the court house. S
f. Develooment of a business plan, which will consider where the
Court House fits with other Oatlands and regional/thematic M
heritage initiatives.
Subject fo the findings of the business plan, seek fo operate
the Court House as a community focused small museum and 7
heritage interpretation centre.
22
 " . i
| a .
, : , ld | ; rater Vee " a
pee = th a
| : e
| --* . \ |
> |
f a =
, (ae &
=> Teast
Wilieiie = e"
i —=—
Roche Hall, 73 High Street, Oatlands is the former Oatlands
State School property, comprising the 1885 Victorian-Gothic
sandstone school building in the centre of Oatlands. The
building has not been used by the Tasmanian Education
Department since the early 2000's and Council has been
Utilising the property for offices and the Centre for Heritage
since that time. In 2014, the Tasmanian Government
divested ownership of the building to council and with
recognition that the site has a high level of community and
social significance If Is intended that the building be used for
Oublic purposes.
Aside from the impressive building, the site itself is very
significant as an historic and archaeological site, having
been the site of:
- Oatlands first settlement (1825)
- The first Oatlands Barracks and military parade
ground (1827)
- The convict barracks from the construction of the
gaol (1835)
- The Oatlands Probation Station (1839)
- The Oatlands Mechanic's Institute (1850s)
- The first Oatlands public school (1850s)
- The Oatlands Area School (1885-c2000’s)
23
 ‘oomninaconantocion oe
This archaeological significance was demonstrated by the 2012 summer archaeology program which
located substantial (shallow and largely intact) remains of the 1827 barracks. The building has a very
high level of Community significance, having been the Oatlands State School within the living
memory of many locals.
The building comprises of four very large rooms, as well as foyers, large hallway, kitchenette and M&F
toilets. There are also large upstairs soaces which have been blocked off in the 1930s. The building Is
currently used as council offices, the headquarters of the Centre for Heritage at Oatlands and as
offices for Rural Alive and Well.
The front yard is used as landscaped public open space and the rear yard is parking. The Oatlands
Military Precinct interpretation trail begins in front of the building and three interpretive platforms are
installed on the site. Interpretation of the Oatlands Arch is to be installed on the former arch site (as a
condition of works approval for the Oatlands Gaol Arch Relocation Project). The site is in a very
Strategic location for Council/public purposes, being in the centre of the town, a large space with
good access. This was recognised in the Oatlands Integrated Development Strategy, which
proposed the ‘Town Square’ principle, which would close Stutzer Street (between the Council
Chambers and Roche Hall).
*1e ° Short/Medium
(6 Infatives
ongoing
Undertake a landscape master plan for the site which
considers the military parade ground, reinstatement of the
State School iron gates, archaeological remains and S
interoretation of the gaol arch.
Undertake essential maintenance to the building and seek to
/ ae
Cc. Explore and promote the archaeological values of the site
through the Southern Midlands Historical Archaeology M
Strategy.
Utilise the building for council operations and other community
-Semmecan
24
 notions ie
; eK PIS Qo
" d ” 4 oN ei RUS
pra $9 — ny
 oO* Se es Bettie ——<— ===
a . -_.- “ts ~~ Fe oe Astnes cha: tle plc: mien) pp» Pontan
Nes ao =x , i [ae a
; bit ° ! ay a De et Bee ag a
t o. 2 “Se oye
= Oatlands Milit
62 . . és haa C OC N) S : : OC ry
he 2% ° m< A, y ;
PN > Ta
Se ee ~2Precinct
See =| 825-1859
ae X \ 7 : — The Interior Capital of Van Diemens Land
The area known as the Oatlands Military Precinct is the area
Previously endorsed bounded by High, Barrack, Church Streets and the
erelrerelaalslalnmelale Esplanade, Oatlands — which is the centre of the town and is
ole) (en still The administrative centre of the Southern Midlands. It Is in
this area where the township was established in the early
- Gotileme’s IMilifxeny 1820s, and by the 1840s it was the centre for what was to
aciner Resacieh intended to become the interior capital of Van Diemens
Project 2010 Land. The precinct comprised of at least 30 buildings
- Various conservation associated with the civil, government and convict
alclalalateMicncreeakelate establishments, and was the longest operating military-lead
olcelarel=tellefeliere] administrative precinct outside the major cities and
faarelatelel=jaal-iall secondary punishment stations in Van Diemens Land - being
ololor lanl ialia (eliicie disbanded in the late 1850s.
Ulalel=\moreleramlarel\irelere]
e)ce)(=xeuy - ; ; ; , ;
The Oatlands Military Precinct is unique, as if was established
as the centre of what was to become a large city — which
didn't eventuate. The remnants of the precinct therefore
have not been subject to as thorough destruction as the
early remnants of those places which were to become
cities. Seven buildings remain of this precinct, and the entire
area has been demonstrated to be an area of extremely
high archaeological potential which may offer vast
knowledge about the formative processes of colonial
military and civil establishments. The Oatlands Gaol and
Court House are included within this precinct, and will be
further detailed below.
20
 NYoLU i at=eamiulcolrolarekmOcolelaled| Malt ire)ilomal-iirelel-myiceli-\ehayAen Ey AenE-} ee
Whilst SMC’s key focus over the next 5+ years will be the restoration and management of
the Council owned buildings within the military precinct (as outlined below), some work on
further Understanding and interpreting the precinct will be Undertaken as a means of
contextualising the buildings within that precinct, and the precinct within the wider colonial
administration. Mechanisms for the protection of the archaeological resources of the
orecinct are also a key consideration in the management of heritage values and work on
understanding these values has been undertaken both by council and the Tasmanian
Heritage Council. Much of the original precinct Is still in government ownership.

*1e ° Short/Medium/
ongoing
Continue to encourage research (historical and archaeo-
logical) into the Oatlands Military Precinct to gain a better
understanding of layout, physical remains and overall context.
Further develop interpretive media for the Oatlands Military
Precinct for incorporation into related interpretation projects.
26
 ee Tole aT=-eaWiulcolrelarekmeColUlaled Maltice)sromal-iirelel-myiceli-\ehayAen oy Aen |
— b i$ Me s im") eel
i oo Mts ~ theweer . ’ | Wed Pi ie, eee + Tees = LA Sy % >, 3 =
me Oe Sia cer yte ey Meat
cree. -.: - = Semana { iz’ \ | Ve ; - i f a Ma a ‘y 5 fr SS % ny vy " t
Pit FA A 4 Wh WG AD Am) ai meta of pe
i {4a WER ADA mh Uh Pe hhh) oo LUN
=r ~~? ! ve a> “em = “pele Piette 2 - ~_ ie aS,
a ae as aa
: ' =. = top| @
ae southern Midlands
ecg C ict Sit
| Building the district
It has long been recognised that the Southern Midlands has
MECWAOLUNY endorsed a wealth of convict heritage, spread throughout the
municipal area. No less than 12 of the 80 known convict
documents relate Probation Station are located in the municipal area as well
policy as at least 10 other road, timber and bridge party stations
> Sauthena IViidlcacs Conwick etc. In addition, there are a number of other convict sites,
Sites Research Project 2013- ranging from watch-houses, police infrastructure, work sites
14 etc. The convict probation system is unique to Tasmania
5 Agdiweslosios| mesacrch and is a key part of the state’s contribution to the world
elesiclasholatoniclotola Kola heritage listing of Australian convict sites.
@XojilelatekwmCicoi-ammelaless
bot Ut presuton ae ; During 2013-14 a major research project was undertaken to
stations ‘some lons/Roa identity, locate, research and document Southern Midlands
irolaiavexovaaliale} F Convict sites. This culminated in a 20 page booklet and a
substantial collection of data on these important sites. An
exhibition was curated and interpretive installations were
erected on several sites.
This research has endless possibilities for further analysis and
potential for developing media and experiences reaching
throughout the region (and indeed inter-regional linkages,
l.e. The Convict Trail) as well as supporting the management
and protection of these sites into the future.
With the recent world heritage listing of Australian convict
sites, Southern Midlands sites have the potential to reap
2/
 NYoLU i at=eamiulcolrolarekmOcolelaled| Malt ire)ilomal-iirelel-myiceli-\ehayAen Ey AenE-} ee
benefit from an increased interest and knowledge of these sites, and being positioned in central
Tasmania on a route used fo traverse between these sites, Ils seen as a substantial opportunity.
er 7. ,
the | |
*” re
, Pe
: ae
yy
*1e ° Short/Medium/
ongoing

Continue to investigate, document and promote the convict

heritage of the Southern Midlands where opportunities arise.

Encourage and foster partnerships with other institutions for the

investigation and promotion of the convict heritage of the

Southern Midlands.

C. Explore possibilities for multimedia interoretation of convict
sites, IN particular those that are difficult to access or have little
above-ground remains.
28
 Se SN SS Ss Sa : OIL aes | ey Rete Tt
~~ “ns . ~~ cut . a, : fet al unde . “a
<* . a i. war: . , 7 r I « ; <i : Ss s ¥ oe P. meets =. J w.
“ay - eS _ - 7 ~l if F errs! “fer
; ’ 5 -&y, ee ee ’ =f ey a!
es h /@ j Si “i
a ~ 6a a | : eee ee .
| | aan p el t fore: ae poe “ 4 ti a ‘ a : ie a
Pe ra ll % ee OE Ge 3 he , ye = «& : —*
. gs he a te oS - : ee. ae ee
) ¥ Fie f — . = ar a : = ey = , | eo ™ . ui
: Sai Ge & : ag” re heer et ~ | See
. oly . ee Se ee —
“ ts. Pom.
- _ - 7 ; . ” . ‘i i
Ve “ e a oT
| . el a.
tees i Ce
= » le bl
Ts ? a- .
Sj —_ hoes ee :
- | eee ee
ae
; €. . 7. pa .
Since 2011, council has been running a 2-3 week summer
archaeology program based at Oatlands which in
conjunction with the Heritage Education and Skills Centre,
aims to partner with various universities to offer a range of
archaeological management experience to graduate and
undergraduate students.
The model of each season is to train 12-15 volunteer
students, utilising council heritage statf and 2-3 volunteer
professional archaeologists and undertake excavations on
at least three sites and survey on several sites during the
three week program. Permits are gained and research
design and planning are undertaken ahead of each
program and students gain experience in planning,
excavation, survey, reporting and artifact managemert.
A public archaeology program is run alongside each
season, culminating in an open day which aftracts 500
people.
Students are invited to submit proposals for follow-up
projects and publications and several postgraduate theses
have been done on Southern Midlands subjects.
In addition (in collaboration with Arts Tasmania) a model has
been formulated for student work-experience in collection
management and curatorship.
29
 NYoLU i at=eamiulcolrolarekmOcolelaled| Malt ire)ilomal-iirelel-myiceli-\ehayAen Ey AenE-} ee
Whilst the excavation and research program has been somewhat ad-hoc to date, largely
resoonding to works-driven archaeological needs, it is recognised that a comprehensive Southern
Midlands Historical Archaeology Strategy is required in order to guide the future of the program
through detailed research agendas, better understanding of resources and site significance and to
set a more strategic direction for the program.

*1e ° Short/Medium/
ongoing
Formulate a Southern Midlands Historical Archaeology Strategy
which sets initiatives, proprities and a research/works agenda
for the next 5 years. S
Complete all reporting and curatorial responsibilities from
previous archaeolgocial works. S
Cc. Contive to facilitate public archaeology programs including
an annual summer archaeology fieldschool in conjunction with
the Centre for Heritage at Oatlands.
Populate the archaeology schedule of the draft Southern
Midlands Planning Scheme (once adopted) in order to offer
adequate protection to important archaeological sites (as
informed by the Southern Midlands Historical Archaeology M
Strategy).
Encourage external researchers to utilise the archaeological
resources (e.g. research, sites and collections) of the Southern
Midlands (as guided by the historical archaeology strategy).
30
 ee Tole aT=-eaWiulcolrelarekmeColUlaled Maltice)sromal-iirelel-myiceli-\ehayAen oy Aen |
use. ~ —_— fg — ,
—— “ nt + * “ . .
pear ,” wan =
= tment te = = |] | 23
—- ou. = = i = 4 «. ES :
Bik Green Ponds
— 1847
r ‘nd ° ° ope .
| a el A Modern adaptation of a significant ruin
The Green Ponds Watch House was constructed in 1847 to a
MEoNACLUN Ae ALC lO) Ko1e design by Colonial Architect William Porden Kay, adjacent to
erelerulaalslalnmelale the Green Ponds Police Office (now SMC Kempton Council
policy Offices). In the 1860s, the Kempton Council Chambers were
built between the two buildings. The watch house was largely
* Green Ponds Watch House demolished in the late 1930s with only the former men's
Conservation Brief 2008. lockup retained and used for the next 80 years as a storage
shed. In 2010, council undertook a refurbishment of the
¢ Kempton Council Offices building, reinstating the original roof pitch and juxtaposing old
Archaeological d to f ' thin the f
Management Plan 2008. and new to form a contemporary space within the former
ruin. Located next fo the council offices, this space Is
intended for community use.
*1e ° Short/Medium/
ongoing
Develop a project plan and undertake a feasibility study on the use of
the watch house as a heritage centre, which might explore partnership 5
opportunities.
Encourage community use of the building for temporary exhibitions,
workshops, meetings etc.
3]
 Tole allen miullol(olare km OvolUlared! Mult irolicom al-Viirelel-MVicel (leh ayAen oyAel ke. ee
AR LD ia SS ;
Ny atl a= :
A Ni aes .
> ‘' |
aha |
a
u %
Mahers Point
— . Cottage
Colonial vernacular — so offen overlooked
Owned by Council, the small sandstone cottage on the southern shore of Lake Dulverton
(distant from the township) has not been used for a number of years. Although the building is
currently uninhabitable, basic maintenance Is undertaken on the building under the
management of the Lake Dulverton/Callington Park Committee, however restoration work is
required If the building Is fo be used for any purpose.
Suggestions have been previously made that this building be used in the interpretation of the
natural values of Lake Dulverton or that it could be used as an adjunct to the current Artist in
Residence program (through Arts Tasmania) which the Oatlands Gaolers Residence is used for.
*1e ° Short/Medium/
Initiatives
ongoing
seek funding fo undertake restoration of the building to a
habitable state. S
Explore use options such as an interpretation centre for the natural
heritage values of the lake, or for use as an artist-in-residence M
facility.
C. Explore options for the restoraiton of the cottage that may include
orivatisation. L
32
 TL. I ve
| %,. | | aa
ei = : a a # af cs _ Js
’ oe :
: %. ie ag lhl
a2 SH | 7
“ ‘ ee i ro
a a | 1a
ay ee a
i a a
Bequeathed to the former Brighton Council by Mr. Anton
Chauncy (husband of writer Nan Chauncy, nee Masterman)
In 1988, and assumed by Southern Midlands Council after
1993 amalgamations, the Chauncy Vale Wildlife Sanctuary ts
a 380 hectare (plus other incorporated nature reserves,
Oublic and private) reserve, just east of Bagdad. The house
and home paddock of Chauncy Vale was later giffed to
Council by Anton’s daughter, Heather Chauncy. A sub-
committee of Council, the Chauncy Vale Management
Committee, manages the reserve under the gazetted
Chauncy Vale Management Plan. Council has an
endorsed business plan for the reserve, and support is
provided by the Friends of Chauncy Vale Inc. The sanctuary
includes vast tracts of natural bush, several caves, as well as
the Day Dawn cottage, home of the Chauncy/Masterman
family from 1918 to 1988'. Day Dawn Cottage is perhaps the
earliest example of formed concrete domestic architecture
in Tasmania. Section 1.2 of the management plan states
that one of the purposes of the plan Is to:
a) provide for the conservation of the cultural and
natural environment of Chauncy Vale
Further, the states roles and responsibilities of Southern
Midlands Council in the management of Chauncy Vale
includes:
33
 Tole allen miullol(olare km OvolUlared! Mult irolicom al-Viirelel-MVicel (leh ayAen oyAel ke. ee
b) restore and maintain the Chauncy house, insure the house and
any material lent for display, and develop a heritage program
through its Chauncy Vale Management Committee.
Cc) undertake, through its Management Committee, heritage
research, interpretation and education programs on its behalf subject
both to adherence with the principles of the ICOMOS Burra Charter,
as well as the input of a professional archaeologist where necessary.
The wishes of Anton Chauncy, as endorsed by his daughter Heather, included that:
c) the house, garden, and small garden, known as ‘the shrine’ be maintained
together with a display of Nan Chauncy’s work in the house.
The above purposes, responsibilities and wishes translate into the objectives of the
management plan, which provide detail on the conservation, protection and promotion of
the natural and cultural heritage values of Chauncy Vale. Of particular relevance to the
Southern Midlands Historic Heritage Strategy 2009-14, is the conservation of the Day Dawn
Cottage, the earlier Cherry Tree Cottage site, as well as the associated gardens and
movable cultural heritage.
In line with the management plan and the proposals contained therein (Section 4.4.2), and
in consultation with the management committee and Friends of Chauncy Vale Inc (and
other stakeholders). the following strategies should be pursued:
*1e ° Short/Medium/
Initiatives
ongoing
As required, review and incorporate specific historic heritage
management strategies in any review of the Chauncy Vale
Management Plan in conjunction with the committee and other S
stakeholders.
Develoo a conservation management plan for Day Dawn
Cottage, which incorporates landscape and archaeological M
management provisions.
34
 ee Tole aT=-eaWiulcolrelarekmeColUlaled Maltice)sromal-iirelel-myiceli-\ehayAen oy Aen |
7, ew D>.
ee co oR —— FA
EEE a a han © We :
— rn ar nf mae ~ a
(ORE =
ne ee ae, .
4 Heritage
r | The machinery of yesteryear
i
Council is the custodian of a collection of horse drawn carriages and associated equipment,
some of which is owned by council and some is on long-term loan from the family of a
benefactor who vested a collection into councils care. A purpose built faculty has been
constructed on the property adjoining the Kempton Recreation ground and a part of the
collection is stored and displayed in that building.
The horse drawn heritage initiative is being progressed by a sub-committee of the Green
Ponds Progress Association. A memorandum of understanding has been entered into with
that organisation which identifies a future development plan for the property within which
the facility is constructed. The equipment is used occasionally for soecial events and there
are plan to eventually open the facility for public visitation.
Council's heritage collection holds other items which are of relevance to horse drawn
heritage and it is intended that these will be incorporated into that initiative in the future.
*1e ° Short/Medium/
ongoing

Continue to work with the Green Ponds Progress Association sub-

committee to support the develooment of future plans for the

facility and collection.

35
 Tole allen miullol(olare km OvolUlared! Mult irolicom al-Viirelel-MVicel (leh ayAen oyAel ke. ee
cs F cog Ss

——* Ss : _—

gi hme Streetscapes and
1 a Land
Tee 1) ve ONQSCADES
eas eee = Step back fo another time
Oatlands —

Council and the residents of Southern Midlands take great
MECNAIOLUN Vol A1O(O) Ko1e pride in the heritage landscapes and streetscapes of the
erelerulaalslalnmelale region, in particular the streetscapes of heritage villages.
ele) (en's Substantial projects have been undertaken over the years

on streetscape improvement in all towns — the obvious being
5 Gstlanck Sirectpecsae Susy the undergrounding of power ines In Qatiands (coupled
1997. with street signage, paving/kerbing and lighting projects).
Towns such as Kempton feature interpretive ‘gateway’ entry
° Oo streetscape study statements and the notable topiary project of Oatlands
aims to perpetuate the historic topiaries of the St Peters Pass
TN YelUli alsa WAl(elelaleocmalslsirelelo area.
mM K@)(sXO1mE AO) RC} PROUULIIU Ke]
eel An important principle to note, which is key to council’s
7 ae decision making processes, Is that the historic towns of the
district need to remain as ‘livable’ towns — and that the
careful evolution of townscape character is needed to
ensure the livability of the townships — planning scheme
provisions are designed to reach that balance. Also,
council is well aqware of the ‘overdoing’ principles of
heritage streetscape/townscape management and care Is
taken to not to ensure that organically evolved heritage
character is not falsely represented in an ‘over-prettied’
streetscape.
36
 ee Tole aT=-eaWiulcolrelarekmeColUlaled Maltice)sromal-iirelel-myiceli-\ehayAen oy Aen |
Important partnerships have been established between council and authorities such as
Aurora energy so that careful consideration is given to minimising (and indeed undoing) the
heritage impact that utility lines (for instance) can have on streetscape values.
In the mid-1990s, a tourism study lamented that the landscape of the midlands was ‘one of
the most uninteresting in Tasmania’. This notion was countered in the 2007 Southern
Midlands Heritage Project, which articulated the significant evidence of thousands of years
of human occupation evident in the cultural landscape of the Southern Midlands and the
cultural heritage values inherent in such. This illustrates a growing appreciation of the
landscape values of the Southern Midlands.
With the proposed amendments and additions to heritage precincts proposed in the draft
planning scheme, coupled with associated guiding documents and character statements,
a greater appreciation and ability to manage the streetscape and landscape values of the
Southern Midlands is being built.
*1e ° Short/Medium/
ongoing
Continue to foster partnerships with utility companies for methods to
minimise/undo installations which have an unnecessary negative
impact upon heritage streetscape/townscapes.
seek funding for the implementation of initiatives to reduce/undo
streetscape elements which have unnecessary impact upon
heritage streetscape/townscapes.
Review the 1997 Oatlands and Kempton Streetscape plans.
Review the implications of any new planning scheme provisions in
terms of approaches to heritage streetscape/landscape projects S
Continue to foster streetscape and landscape improvement
initiatives consistent with planning scheme provisions.
37
 aa
Pe ees | ae
_ SeA _.
a S |
g
| a
ee
af
cm N
Southern Midlands Council holds a significant collection of
heritage items. In the past, the collection has been
managed in an ad-hoc fashion, with no_- regular
conservation activities and no regular assessment of
storage/display conditions, security etc. With ongoing
archaeological excavations, the heritage collection has
grown, and will further over the next 5+ years, therefore It
has been recognised by Council that a more systematic
and thorough management system is required for heritage
collections.
In 2007, Council adopted a_e Heritage Collection
Management Policy, which outlines the parameters for
managing the collection, including accessioning,
deaccessioning, loans, maintenance, display, review etc.
From this policy, a series of procedures have been put in-
place and management documents have been produced,
which include:
e A heritage collections and archaeolgoiocal
collections database.
e An online heritage interiors database (in
conjnunciton with external stakeholders)
e Procedures manuals for the broad collection
categories
e Field manual for archaeological finds
38
 ee Tole aT=-eaWiulcolrelarekmeColUlaled Maltice)sromal-iirelel-myiceli-\ehayAen oy Aen |
e Maintenance regime for storage/display facilities
e Disaster preparedness manual
e Audit procedures
Partnerships with Arts Tasmania have been beneficial in the development of these processes. An
archaeological artifact processing laboratory has been established in the Oatlands Gaolers
Residence. A long-term project of populating the databases as well as ongoing audit of
collection storage and dispkay facilities is ongoing.
Further to collection management policies, arises the requirement for display and storage
facilities. A preservation survey was undertaken on the Oatlands Gaol and Court House
collections, which also examined several Council managed properties for their suitability in
housing the collection. Arising from this report, a discussion paper on the suitability of several
Council managed properties was more closely examined, incorporating conservation principles
as well as resourcing and management constraints. This paper concluded that the front-western
room of the Oatlands Sucreme Court House should be fitted as a publicly interoreted collection
store as a short-medium term measure, with Council to pursue acquisition of a State owned
Police building for development as a longer-term facility. As an alternative to the court house, an
upstairs room at the Oatlands Gaolers Residence has been fitted as a ‘temporary’ collection
store, which is not ideal. A high priority is to establish an industry standard collection store which
may also have commercial possibilities to offer services to external clients.
*1e ° Short/Medium/
ongoing

Continue to refine and implement heritage collection procedures

further to council’s heritage collection policy.

Establish an industry standard collection store to house council's

heritage collection. S

Cc, Ensure that all heritage collection display spaces are adequate and

appropriate for their purpose.

Continue to utilise council's heritage collection for research and

display.

Continue partnerships with relevant agencies/groups/individuals with

an interest in heritage collections.

Continue to pursue online availability of heritage collection data. 0
Undertake a feasibility study and seek fo establish a ‘commercial’
heritage/archaeological collections store to house council's collection M
and to offer collection management services to others.

39
 Tole allen miullol(olare km OvolUlared! Mult irolicom al-Viirelel-MVicel (leh ayAen oyAel ke. ee
i OR
I “J | | a :
iN | : |
a vida ee
|
wey
=; F
kinase Ay =
Br) 4 as ou. ’
+
no omer
iy, Oh
Where possible, SMC’s Heritage Program integrates student
and community education programs in heritage projects as
a means of:
e Disseminating heritage information to the wider
community
e Assisting the Community to understand, protect and
promote their local heritage
e Encouraging the interest of students and researchers to
utilise the heritage resources of the Southern Midlands
A major step in engaging the public in heritage education is the 2010 establishment of the
Centre for Heritage at Oatlands — Heritage Education and Skills Centre (HESC), which is a not-
for-profit Community focused heritage skills training organisation owned by Council. HESC
develops and delivers a series of heritage short-courses in subjects from heritage interpretation,
trade skills, archaeology and museum skills. HESC also aligns heritage skills training with tourism
and has also forged alliances with several local schools and universities Australia-wide to
facilitate student projects (the annual summer archaeology program is an example of this).
Council is a key partner in all of these initiatives and continues to support HESC and initiatives
on local projects and sites are a priority.
Council recognises the need to include the community in all aspects of heritage management
and public consultation and participation is encourage in the planning and implementation of
heritage projects.
40
 ee Tole aT=-eaWiulcolrelarekmeColUlaled Maltice)sromal-iirelel-myiceli-\ehayAen oy Aen |
*1e ° Short/Medium/
ongoing

Continue to develoo and stage education and public
programs attached to heritage projects, in particular the
summer archaeology program and associated public
archaeology program/open days.
Work with the Heritage Education and Skills Centre to promote
the heritage of the Southern Midlands in wider heritage
education and skills programs.

Cc. Where possible, assist students and researchers investigate and
oromote the heritage of the Southern Midlands
When possible, include Southern Midlands activities in wider
heritage ‘festival’ programs such as the National Trust Heritage M
Festival, National Archaeoogy Week etc.
Work with local schools to include Southern Midlands heritage
themes into curriculum.

f. Consider the develooment of a research bursary scheme
where value for money to council can be demonstrated in the s
support of undergaduate and postgraduate students.
Engage the public wherever possible in the planning and
implementation of heritage projects.

4]
 soaennnacenanchner ioe 20 I
: . i
=, . ah
S ie) Gee coin) 422
* aa : im (hy = Uh = “aeene
a —= oe ny )/ ao
3 ee a he oe me = 7 he ‘b Se
— ya
| i Rye
. aa wd ' a
| a. ih al
V j ¥ ~ Rar - 7; 7 =the
With the general appeal of Southern Midlands heritage sites,
it Is Obvious that tourism should play a large part in the
heritage industry of the district. All projects involve various
degrees of interoretation and promotion. Initiatives such as
the Heritage Highway Tourism Association, Skulduggery, the
Central Tasmanian Tourism Centre, Exploring the Southern
Midlands and Shadows of the Past are all SMC sponsored
projects, which successfully blend heritage with fourism.
Council heritage projects, such as Callington Mill, the
Oatlands Military Precinct and Southern Midlands Convict
Sites all have © significant interpretive and tourism
components.
SMC operate the Central Tasmanian Tourism Centre, and it Is
essential that with any heritage projects in which Council
has an involvement, that there be consultation between
heritage managers and the staff of the tourism centre. It is
also essential that SMC maintain partnerships and a positive
working relationship with agencies such as Tourism
Tasmania, the Heritage Highway Region Tourism Association,
and Totally South etc.
Whilst if is Obvious that the Southern Midlands has a wealth
of historic cultural heritage sites, both privately and publicly
owned, which have the potential to be integrated into
tourism initiatives, a strategic approach to the promotion
42
 ee Tole aT=-eaWiulcolrelarekmeColUlaled Maltice)sromal-iirelel-myiceli-\ehayAen oy Aen |
and interpretation of these sites is required. It is recognised that an unplanned and ad-hoc
approach to heritage place interpretation is rarely beneficial, and that careful planning is required
to deliver a quality experience linked to wider initiatives — both geographically and thematically.
Uniformity in branding, alignment with statewide strategies and meaningful well-planned delivery is
essential.
*1e ° Short/Medium/
| / INITIATIVES Long-term or
ongoing
Better identify those places within Southern Midlands which have
the potential for integration into heritage tourism initiatives — both
geographically and thematically, with a particular focus on S
oublicly owned sites.
Continue to foster an alignment to statewide heritage tourism
strategies and principles.
Cc. Ensure that the interoretation of Southern Midlands heritage
places is modern, dynamic, unique and memorable.
seek linkages and cooperative heritage tourism projects with
other Councils within the sub-region.
Promote the use of council owned heritage sites in regional and
statewide events/Testivals (even if not heirlage focussed).
43
 Tole allen miullol(olare km OvolUlared! Mult irolicom al-Viirelel-MVicel (leh ayAen oyAel ke.
fp eS] I | = |
r I. es pi =e 2 | 3 We ™ —— |
oT A eee | ae | a. ,
7 oe TES | bi 1. oe >} ,
em
, dg ta. <_ eee
Cs “pe Be — oa iG
rh Sane ears = iit = ey, Wr
aera 2 at ee ose |
Se PS an ieee I
See) Partnerships
oe. im eid. see . i
=} 2 ae ae: ee UF Promoting a network of people reaching for a
een ere “e" « 9 -$e- “~~
ee ee 5 common goal
_ = i >) ag a . Ps
p : A A Council recognises that there are countless
fEVvloUsly CNQOlse heritage/culture/arts interest groups and individuals within
ololorulaalslainmelale (and outside of) Tasmania who have an interest in the
exe) tea’, Southern Midlands and other common heritage themes. It is
the intent of council to wherever possible work with such
groups towards the common goal of researching, preserving
and promoting the heritage values of the region.
Within the region there are a number of heritage groups
who provide valuable services and support to the public in
promoting and preserving the heritage of the region, these
include the various local historical societies, small museums
and individuals.
ore ° Short/Medium/
18 Initiatives Long-term or
ongoing
Q. Provide support wherever possible for groups and individuals with an
interest in the heritage of the Southern Midlands. O
b. Work with agencies such as the Tasmanian Heritage Council, National
Trust, Heritage Tasmania, Tourism Tasmana etc. on the management O
of heritage within the Soutehrn Midlands and/or related themes.
44
 ‘ :

hi

. ae -
TKofom ili iColaakwemiuvelarele (lm al-iirele(-m ake) (-Loa Seams y-) o)(-Janl olay 40N ER
